
prelud.


who that care much to know the histori of man, and how the 
mixtur behav under the vari experi of time, ha not dwelt,
at least briefli, on the life of saint theresa, ha not smile 
some gentl at the thought of the littl girl walk forth 
morn hand-in-hand with her still smaller brother, to go and 
martyrdom in the countri of the moor? out thei toddl from 
avila, wide-ei and helpless-look as two fawn, but with 
heart, alreadi beat to a nation idea; until domest realiti 
them in the shape of uncl, and turn them back from their 
resolv. that child-pilgrimag wa a fit begin. theresa’
passion, ideal natur demand an epic life: what were mani-
romanc of chivalri and the social conquest of a brilliant girl 
her? her flame quickli burn up that light fuel; and, fed from within,
soar after some illimit satisfact, some object which 
never justifi weari, which would reconcil self-despair with 
raptur conscious of life beyond self. she found her epo in 
reform of a religi order.

that spanish woman who live three hundr year ago, wa certainli 
the last of her kind. mani theresa have been born who found 
themselv no epic life wherein there wa a constant unfold 
far-reson action; perhap onli a life of mistak, the offspr 
a certain spiritu grandeur ill-match with the mean 
opportun; perhap a tragic failur which found no sacr poet 
sank unwept into oblivion. with dim light and tangl 
thei tri to shape their thought and deed in nobl agreement; 
after all, to common ey their struggl seem mere inconsist 
formless; for these later-born theresa were help by no 
social faith and order which could perform the function of 
for the ardent will soul. their ardor altern between a 
ideal and the common yearn of womanhood; so that the on 
disapprov as extravag, and the other condemn as a laps.

some have felt that these blunder live ar due to the 
indefinit with which the suprem power ha fashion the 
of women: if there were on level of feminin incompet as strict 
the abil to count three and no more, the social lot of women 
be treat with scientif certitud. meanwhil the 
remain, and the limit of variat ar realli much wider than ani 
would imagin from the same of women’s coiffur and the 
love-stori in prose and vers. here and there a cygnet is 
uneasili among the duckl in the brown pond, and never find 
live stream in fellowship with it own oari-foot kind. here 
there is born a saint theresa, foundress of noth, whose 
heart-beat and sob after an unattain good trembl off and 
dispers among hindranc, instead of centr in 
long-recogniz deed.




book i.
miss brook.




chapter i.

sinc i can do no good becaus a woman,
reach constantli at someth that is near it.
                    —_the maid’s tragedi:_ beaumont and fletcher.


miss brook had that kind of beauti which seem to be thrown 
relief by poor dress. her hand and wrist were so fine form that 
could wear sleev not less bare of style than those in which 
bless virgin appear to italian painter; and her profil as well 
her statur and bear seem to gain the more digniti from her 
garment, which by the side of provinci fashion gave her 
impress of a fine quotat from the bibl,—or from on of 
elder poet,—in a paragraph of to-dai’s newspap. she wa 
spoken of as be remark clever, but with the addit that 
sister celia had more common-sens. nevertheless, celia wore 
more trim; and it wa onli to close observ that her 
differ from her sister’s, and had a shade of coquetri in 
arrang; for miss brook’s plain dress wa due to 
condit, in most of which her sister share. the pride of 
ladi had someth to do with it: the brook connect, though 
exactli aristocrat, were unquestion “good:” if you 
backward for a gener or two, you would not find ani yard-
or parcel-ty forefath—anyth lower than an admir or 
clergyman; and there wa even an ancestor discern as a 
gentleman who serv under cromwel, but afterward conform, 
manag to come out of all polit troubl as the proprietor of 
respect famili estat. young women of such birth, live in a 
countri-hous, and attend a villag church hardli larger than 
parlor, natur regard fripperi as the ambit of a huckster’
daughter. then there wa well-bred economi, which in those dai 
show in dress the first item to be deduct from, when ani margin 
requir for expens more distinct of rank. such reason would 
been enough to account for plain dress, quit apart from 
feel; but in miss brook’s case, religion alon would 
determin it; and celia mildli acquiesc in all her sister’
sentiment, onli infus them with that common-sens which is abl 
accept moment doctrin without ani eccentr agit. 
knew mani passag of pascal’s pense and of jeremi taylor by heart;
and to her the destini of mankind, seen by the light of christian,
made the solicitud of feminin fashion appear an occup 
bedlam. she could not reconcil the anxieti of a spiritu 
involv etern consequ, with a keen interest in gimp 
artifici protrus of draperi. her mind wa theoret, and 
by it natur after some lofti concept of the world which 
frankli includ the parish of tipton and her own rule of conduct there;
she wa enamour of intens and great, and rash in 
whatev seem to her to have those aspect; like to seek martyrdom,
to make retract, and then to incur martyrdom after all in 
quarter where she had not sought it. certainli such element in 
charact of a marriag girl tend to interfer with her lot, 
hinder it from be decid accord to custom, by good look,
vaniti, and mere canin affect. with all thi, she, the elder 
the sister, wa not yet twenti, and thei had both been educ, 
thei were about twelv year old and had lost their parent, on 
at onc narrow and promiscu, first in an english famili 
afterward in a swiss famili at lausann, their bachelor uncl 
guardian try in thi wai to remedi the disadvantag of 
orphan condit.

it wa hardli a year sinc thei had come to live at tipton grang 
their uncl, a man nearli sixti, of acquiesc temper, 
opinion, and uncertain vote. he had travel in hi younger year,
and wa held in thi part of the counti to have contract a 
rambl habit of mind. mr. brook’s conclus were as difficult 
predict as the weather: it wa onli safe to sai that he would act 
benevol intent, and that he would spend as littl monei 
possibl in carri them out. for the most glutin 
mind enclos some hard grain of habit; and a man ha been seen 
about all hi own interest except the retent of hi snuff-box,
concern which he wa watch, suspici, and greedi of clutch.

in mr. brook the hereditari strain of puritan energi wa clearli 
abey; but in hi niec dorothea it glow alik through fault 
virtu, turn sometim into impati of her uncl’s talk or 
wai of “let thing be” on hi estat, and make her long all 
more for the time when she would be of ag and have some command 
monei for gener scheme. she wa regard as an heiress; for 
onli had the sister seven hundr a-year each from their parent, 
if dorothea marri and had a son, that son would inherit mr. brook’
estat, presum worth about three thousand a-year—a rental 
seem wealth to provinci famili, still discuss mr. peel’s 
conduct on the cathol question, innoc of futur gold-field, 
of that gorgeou plutocraci which ha so nobli exalt the 
of genteel life.

and how should dorothea not marri?—a girl so handsom and with 
prospect? noth could hinder it but her love of extrem, and 
insist on regul life accord to notion which might caus 
wari man to hesit befor he made her an offer, or even might 
her at last to refus all offer. a young ladi of some birth 
fortun, who knelt suddenli down on a brick floor by the side of a 
labor and prai fervidli as if she thought herself live in 
time of the apostl—who had strang whim of fast like a papist,
and of sit up at night to read old theolog book! such a 
might awaken you some fine morn with a new scheme for 
applic of her incom which would interfer with polit 
and the keep of saddl-hors: a man would natur think 
befor he risk himself in such fellowship. women were expect 
have weak opinion; but the great safeguard of societi and of 
life wa, that opinion were not act on. sane peopl did what 
neighbor did, so that if ani lunat were at larg, on might 
and avoid them.

the rural opinion about the new young ladi, even among the cottag,
wa gener in favor of celia, as be so amiabl 
innoc-look, while miss brook’s larg ey seem, like 
religion, too unusu and strike. poor dorothea! compar with her,
the innoc-look celia wa know and worldli-wise; so 
subtler is a human mind than the outsid tissu which make a sort 
blazonri or clock-face for it.

yet those who approach dorothea, though prejud against her 
thi alarm hearsai, found that she had a charm 
reconcil with it. most men thought her bewitch when she wa 
horseback. she love the fresh air and the variou aspect of 
countri, and when her ey and cheek glow with mingl pleasur 
look veri littl like a devote. ride wa an indulg which 
allow herself in spite of conscienti qualm; she felt that 
enjoi it in a pagan sensuou wai, and alwai look forward 
renounc it.

she wa open, ardent, and not in the least self-admir; inde, 
wa pretti to see how her imagin adorn her sister celia 
attract altogeth superior to her own, and if ani 
appear to come to the grang from some other motiv than that 
see mr. brook, she conclud that he must be in love with celia:
sir jame chettam, for exampl, whom she constantli consid 
celia’s point of view, inwardli debat whether it would be good 
celia to accept him. that he should be regard as a suitor to 
would have seem to her a ridicul irrelev. dorothea, with 
her eager to know the truth of life, retain veri childlik 
about marriag. she felt sure that she would have accept 
judici hooker, if she had been born in time to save him from 
wretch mistak he made in matrimoni; or john milton when 
blind had come on; or ani of the other great men whose odd 
it would have been gloriou pieti to endur; but an amiabl 
baronet, who said “exactli” to her remark even when she 
uncertainti,—how could he affect her as a lover? the realli 
marriag must be that where your husband wa a sort of father, 
could teach you even hebrew, if you wish it.

these peculiar of dorothea’s charact caus mr. brook to be 
the more blame in neighbor famili for not secur 
middl-ag ladi as guid and companion to hi niec. but he 
dread so much the sort of superior woman like to be avail 
such a posit, that he allow himself to be dissuad by dorothea’
object, and wa in thi case brave enough to defi the world—that 
to sai, mr. cadwallad the rector’s wife, and the small group 
gentri with whom he visit in the northeast corner of loamshir. 
miss brook presid in her uncl’s household, and did not at 
dislik her new author, with the homag that belong to it.

sir jame chettam wa go to dine at the grang to-dai with 
gentleman whom the girl had never seen, and about whom dorothea 
some vener expect. thi wa the reverend edward casaubon,
note in the counti as a man of profound learn, understood for 
year to be engag on a great work concern religi histori; 
as a man of wealth enough to give lustr to hi pieti, and have 
of hi own which were to be more clearli ascertain on the 
of hi book. hi veri name carri an impress hardli to 
measur without a precis chronolog of scholarship.

earli in the dai dorothea had return from the infant school which 
had set go in the villag, and wa take her usual place in 
pretti sit-room which divid the bedroom of the sister, bent 
finish a plan for some build (a kind of work which she 
in), when celia, who had been watch her with a hesit desir 
propos someth, said—

“dorothea, dear, if you don’t mind—if you ar not veri busi—suppos 
look at mamma’s jewel to-dai, and divid them? it is exactli 
month to-dai sinc uncl gave them to you, and you have not look 
them yet.”

celia’s face had the shadow of a pout express in it, the 
presenc of the pout be kept back by an habitu aw of dorothea 
principl; two associ fact which might show a 
electr if you touch them incauti. to her relief, dorothea’
ey were full of laughter as she look up.

“what a wonder littl almanac you ar, celia! is it six calendar 
six lunar month?”

“it is the last dai of septemb now, and it wa the first of 
when uncl gave them to you. you know, he said that he had 
them till then. i believ you have never thought of them sinc 
lock them up in the cabinet here.”

“well, dear, we should never wear them, you know.” dorothea spoke in 
full cordial tone, half caress, half explanatori. she had her 
in her hand, and wa make tini side-plan on a margin.

celia color, and look veri grave. “i think, dear, we ar want 
respect to mamma’s memori, to put them by and take no notic of them.
and,” she ad, after hesit a littl, with a rise sob 
mortif, “necklac ar quit usual now; and madam poincon, 
wa stricter in some thing even than you ar, us to wear ornament.
and christian gener—sure there ar women in heaven now who 
jewel.” celia wa consciou of some mental strength when she 
appli herself to argument.

“you would like to wear them?” exclaim dorothea, an air of 
discoveri anim her whole person with a dramat action which 
had caught from that veri madam poincon who wore the ornament. “
cours, then, let us have them out. why did you not tell me befor? 
the kei, the kei!” she press her hand against the side of 
head and seem to despair of her memori.

“thei ar here,” said celia, with whom thi explan had been 
medit and prearrang.

“prai open the larg drawer of the cabinet and get out the jewel-box.”

the casket wa soon open befor them, and the variou jewel 
out, make a bright parterr on the tabl. it wa no great collect,
but a few of the ornament were realli of remark beauti, the 
that wa obviou at first be a necklac of purpl amethyst set 
exquisit gold work, and a pearl cross with five brilliant in it.
dorothea immedi took up the necklac and fasten it round 
sister’s neck, where it fit almost as close as a bracelet; but 
circl suit the henrietta-maria style of celia’s head and neck, 
she could see that it did, in the pier-glass opposit.

“there, celia! you can wear that with your indian muslin. but 
cross you must wear with your dark dress.”

celia wa try not to smile with pleasur. “o dodo, you must keep 
cross yourself.”

“no, no, dear, no,” said dorothea, put up her hand with 
deprec.

“ye, inde you must; it would suit you—in your black dress, now,”
said celia, insistingli. “you _might_ wear that.”

“not for the world, not for the world. a cross is the last thing 
would wear as a trinket.” dorothea shudder slightli.

“then you will think it wick in me to wear it,” said celia, uneasili.

“no, dear, no,” said dorothea, stroke her sister’s cheek. “soul 
complexion too: what will suit on will not suit anoth.”

“but you might like to keep it for mamma’s sake.”

“no, i have other thing of mamma’s—her sandal-wood box which i am 
fond of—plenti of thing. in fact, thei ar all your, dear. we 
discuss them no longer. there—take awai your properti.”

celia felt a littl hurt. there wa a strong assumpt of 
in thi puritan toler, hardli less try to the blond flesh 
an unenthusiast sister than a puritan persecut.

“but how can i wear ornament if you, who ar the elder sister, 
never wear them?”

“nai, celia, that is too much to ask, that i should wear trinket 
keep you in counten. if i were to put on such a necklac as that, 
should feel as if i had been pirouet. the world would go round 
me, and i should not know how to walk.”

celia had unclasp the necklac and drawn it off. “it would be 
littl tight for your neck; someth to lie down and hang would 
you better,” she said, with some satisfact. the complet 
of the necklac from all point of view for dorothea, made 
happier in take it. she wa open some ring-box, which 
a fine emerald with diamond, and just then the sun pass beyond 
cloud sent a bright gleam over the tabl.

“how veri beauti these gem ar!” said dorothea, under a new 
of feel, as sudden as the gleam. “it is strang how deepli 
seem to penetr on, like scent. i suppos that is the reason 
gem ar us as spiritu emblem in the revel of st. john. 
look like fragment of heaven. i think that emerald is more 
than ani of them.”

“and there is a bracelet to match it,” said celia. “we did not 
thi at first.”

“thei ar love,” said dorothea, slip the ring and bracelet on 
fine turn finger and wrist, and hold them toward the window 
a level with her ey. all the while her thought wa try to 
her delight in the color by merg them in her mystic religi joi.

“you _would_ like those, dorothea,” said celia, rather falteringli,
begin to think with wonder that her sister show some weak,
and also that emerald would suit her own complexion even better 
purpl amethyst. “you must keep that ring and bracelet—if 
els. but see, these agat ar veri pretti and quiet.”

“ye! i will keep these—thi ring and bracelet,” said dorothea. then,
let her hand fall on the tabl, she said in anoth tone—“yet 
miser men find such thing, and work at them, and sell them!” 
paus again, and celia thought that her sister wa go to 
the ornament, as in consist she ought to do.

“ye, dear, i will keep these,” said dorothea, decidedli. “but take 
the rest awai, and the casket.”

she took up her pencil without remov the jewel, and still 
at them. she thought of often have them by her, to feed her ey 
these littl fountain of pure color.

“shall you wear them in compani?” said celia, who wa watch her 
real curios as to what she would do.

dorothea glanc quickli at her sister. across all her 
adorn of those whom she love, there dart now and then a 
discern, which wa not without a scorch qualiti. if miss 
ever attain perfect meek, it would not be for lack of 
fire.

“perhap,” she said, rather haughtili. “i cannot tell to what level 
mai sink.”

celia blush, and wa unhappi: she saw that she had offend 
sister, and dare not sai even anyth pretti about the gift of 
ornament which she put back into the box and carri awai. 
too wa unhappi, as she went on with her plan-draw, question 
puriti of her own feel and speech in the scene which had end 
that littl explos.

celia’s conscious told her that she had not been at all in 
wrong: it wa quit natur and justifi that she should have 
that question, and she repeat to herself that dorothea 
inconsist: either she should have taken her full share of 
jewel, or, after what she had said, she should have renounc 
altogeth.

“i am sure—at least, i trust,” thought celia, “that the wear of 
necklac will not interfer with my prayer. and i do not see that 
should be bound by dorothea’s opinion now we ar go into societi,
though of cours she herself ought to be bound by them. but dorothea 
not alwai consist.”

thu celia, mute bend over her tapestri, until she heard 
sister call her.

“here, kitti, come and look at my plan; i shall think i am a 
architect, if i have not got incompat stair and fireplac.”

as celia bent over the paper, dorothea put her cheek against 
sister’s arm caressingli. celia understood the action. dorothea 
that she had been in the wrong, and celia pardon her. sinc 
could rememb, there had been a mixtur of critic and aw in 
attitud of celia’s mind toward her elder sister. the younger 
alwai worn a yoke; but is there ani yoke creatur without it 
opinion?




chapter ii.

“‘dime; no ve aquel caballero que hacia nosotro vien sobr 
caballo rucio rodado que trae puesto en la cabeza un yelmo de oro?’ ‘
que veo y columbro,’ respondio sancho, ‘no es sino un hombr sobr 
as no pardo como el mio, que trae sobr la cabeza una cosa 
relumbra.’ ‘pue es es el yelmo de mambrino,’ dijo 
quijot.”—cervant.


“‘seest thou not yon cavali who cometh toward us on a dappl-
steed, and weareth a golden helmet?’ ‘what i see,’ answer sancho, ‘
noth but a man on a grai ass like my own, who carri 
shini on hi head.’ ‘just so,’ answer don quixot: ‘and 
resplend object is the helmet of mambrino.’”


“sir humphri davi?” said mr. brook, over the soup, in hi easi 
wai, take up sir jame chettam’s remark that he wa studi davi’
agricultur chemistri. “well, now, sir humphri davi; i dine with 
year ago at cartwright’s, and wordsworth wa there too—the 
wordsworth, you know. now there wa someth singular. i wa 
cambridg when wordsworth wa there, and i never met him—and i 
with him twenti year afterward at cartwright’s. there’s an odditi 
thing, now. but davi wa there: he wa a poet too. or, as i mai sai,
wordsworth wa poet on, and davi wa poet two. that wa true in 
sens, you know.”

dorothea felt a littl more uneasi than usual. in the begin 
dinner, the parti be small and the room still, these mote from 
mass of a magistr’s mind fell too notic. she wonder how a 
like mr. casaubon would support such trivial. hi manner, 
thought, were veri dignifi; the set of hi iron-grai hair and 
deep ey-socket made him resembl the portrait of lock. he had 
spare form and the pale complexion which becam a student; as 
as possibl from the bloom englishman of the red-whisker 
repres by sir jame chettam.

“i am read the agricultur chemistri,” said thi excel baronet,
“becaus i am go to take on of the farm into my own hand, and 
if someth cannot be done in set a good pattern of farm 
my tenant. do you approv of that, miss brook?”

“a great mistak, chettam,” interpos mr. brook, “go 
electrifi your land and that kind of thing, and make a parlor 
your cow-hous. it won’t do. i went into scienc a great deal myself 
on time; but i saw it would not do. it lead to everyth; you 
let noth alon. no, no—see that your tenant don’t sell their straw,
and that kind of thing; and give them drain-tile, you know. 
your fanci farm will not do—the most expens sort of whistl 
can bui: you mai as well keep a pack of hound.”

“sure,” said dorothea, “it is better to spend monei in find 
how men can make the most of the land which support them all, than 
keep dog and hors onli to gallop over it. it is not a sin to 
yourself poor in perform experi for the good of all.”

she spoke with more energi than is expect of so young a ladi, but 
jame had appeal to her. he wa accustom to do so, and she 
often thought that she could urg him to mani good action when he 
her brother-in-law.

mr. casaubon turn hi ey veri markedli on dorothea while she 
speak, and seem to observ her newli.

“young ladi don’t understand polit economi, you know,” said mr.
brook, smile toward mr. casaubon. “i rememb when we were 
read adam smith. _there_ is a book, now. i took in all the new 
at on time—human perfect, now. but some sai, histori move 
circl; and that mai be veri well argu; i have argu it myself. 
fact is, human reason mai carri you a littl too far—over the hedg, 
fact. it carri me a good wai at on time; but i saw it would not do.
i pull up; i pull up in time. but not too hard. i have alwai 
in favor of a littl theori: we must have thought; els we shall 
land back in the dark ag. but talk of book, there is southei’
‘peninsular war.’ i am read that of a morn. you know southei?”

“no,” said mr. casaubon, not keep pace with mr. brook’s 
reason, and think of the book onli. “i have littl leisur for 
literatur just now. i have been us up my eyesight on old 
late; the fact is, i want a reader for my even; but i 
fastidi in voic, and i cannot endur listen to an 
reader. it is a misfortun, in some sens: i feed too much on 
inward sourc; i live too much with the dead. my mind is 
like the ghost of an ancient, wander about the world and 
mental to construct it as it us to be, in spite of ruin 
confus chang. but i find it necessari to us the utmost 
about my eyesight.”

thi wa the first time that mr. casaubon had spoken at ani length. 
deliv himself with precis, as if he had been call upon to 
a public statement; and the balanc sing-song neat of hi speech,
occasion correspond to by a movement of hi head, wa the 
conspicu from it contrast with good mr. brook’s 
slovenli. dorothea said to herself that mr. casaubon wa the 
interest man she had ever seen, not except even monsieur liret,
the vaudoi clergyman who had given confer on the histori of 
waldens. to reconstruct a past world, doubtless with a view to 
highest purpos of truth—what a work to be in ani wai present at, 
assist in, though onli as a lamp-holder! thi elev thought 
her abov her annoy at be twit with her ignor 
polit economi, that never-explain scienc which wa thrust as 
extinguish over all her light.

“but you ar fond of ride, miss brook,” sir jame present took 
opportun of sai. “i should have thought you would enter a 
into the pleasur of hunt. i wish you would let me send over 
chestnut hors for you to try. it ha been train for a ladi. i 
you on saturdai canter over the hill on a nag not worthi of you. 
groom shall bring corydon for you everi dai, if you will onli 
the time.”

“thank you, you ar veri good. i mean to give up ride. i shall 
ride ani more,” said dorothea, urg to thi brusqu resolut by 
littl annoy that sir jame would be solicit her attent 
she want to give it all to mr. casaubon.

“no, that is too hard,” said sir jame, in a tone of reproach 
show strong interest. “your sister is given to self-mortif, 
she not?” he continu, turn to celia, who sat at hi right hand.

“i think she is,” said celia, feel afraid lest she should 
someth that would not pleas her sister, and blush as prettili 
possibl abov her necklac. “she like give up.”

“if that were true, celia, my give-up would be self-indulg, 
self-mortif. but there mai be good reason for choos not 
do what is veri agreeabl,” said dorothea.

mr. brook wa speak at the same time, but it wa evid that mr.
casaubon wa observ dorothea, and she wa awar of it.

“exactli,” said sir jame. “you give up from some high, 
motiv.”

“no, inde, not exactli. i did not sai that of myself,” 
dorothea, redden. unlik celia, she rare blush, and onli 
high delight or anger. at thi moment she felt angri with the 
sir jame. why did he not pai attent to celia, and leav her 
listen to mr. casaubon?—if that learn man would onli talk, instead 
allow himself to be talk to by mr. brook, who wa just 
inform him that the reform either meant someth or it 
not, that he himself wa a protest to the core, but that 
wa a fact; and as to refus an acr of your ground for a 
chapel, all men need the bridl of religion, which, 
speak, wa the dread of a hereaft.

“i made a great studi of theologi at on time,” said mr. brook, as 
to explain the insight just manifest. “i know someth of 
school. i knew wilberforc in hi best dai. do you know wilberforc?”

mr. casaubon said, “no.”

“well, wilberforc wa perhap not enough of a thinker; but if i 
into parliament, as i have been ask to do, i should sit on 
independ bench, as wilberforc did, and work at philanthropi.”

mr. casaubon bow, and observ that it wa a wide field.

“ye,” said mr. brook, with an easi smile, “but i have document. 
began a long while ago to collect document. thei want arrang, 
when a question ha struck me, i have written to somebodi and got 
answer. i have document at my back. but now, how do you arrang 
document?”

“in pigeon-hole partli,” said mr. casaubon, with rather a startl 
of effort.

“ah, pigeon-hole will not do. i have tri pigeon-hole, 
everyth get mix in pigeon-hole: i never know whether a paper 
in a or z.”

“i wish you would let me sort your paper for you, uncl,” 
dorothea. “i would letter them all, and then make a list of 
under each letter.”

mr. casaubon grave smile approv, and said to mr. brook, “you 
an excel secretari at hand, you perceiv.”

“no, no,” said mr. brook, shake hi head; “i cannot let young 
meddl with my document. young ladi ar too flighti.”

dorothea felt hurt. mr. casaubon would think that her uncl had 
special reason for deliv thi opinion, wherea the remark lai 
hi mind as lightli as the broken wing of an insect among all the 
fragment there, and a chanc current had sent it alight on _her_.

when the two girl were in the draw-room alon, celia said—

“how veri ugli mr. casaubon is!”

“celia! he is on of the most distinguish-look men i ever saw. 
is remark like the portrait of lock. he ha the same 
ey-socket.”

“had lock those two white mole with hair on them?”

“oh, i dare sai! when peopl of a certain sort look at him,” 
dorothea, walk awai a littl.

“mr. casaubon is so sallow.”

“all the better. i suppos you admir a man with the complexion of 
_cochon de lait_.”

“dodo!” exclaim celia, look after her in surpris. “i never 
you make such a comparison befor.”

“why should i make it befor the occas came? it is a 
comparison: the match is perfect.”

miss brook wa clearli forget herself, and celia thought so.

“i wonder you show temper, dorothea.”

“it is so pain in you, celia, that you will look at human be 
if thei were mere anim with a toilet, and never see the great 
in a man’s face.”

“ha mr. casaubon a great soul?” celia wa not without a touch of 
malic.

“ye, i believ he ha,” said dorothea, with the full voic 
decis. “everyth i see in him correspond to hi pamphlet 
biblic cosmolog.”

“he talk veri littl,” said 

“there is no on for him to talk to.”

celia thought privat, “dorothea quit despis sir jame chettam; 
believ she would not accept him.” celia felt that thi wa a piti. 
had never been deceiv as to the object of the baronet’s interest.
sometim, inde, she had reflect that dodo would perhap not make 
husband happi who had not her wai of look at thing; and stifl 
the depth of her heart wa the feel that her sister wa 
religi for famili comfort. notion and scrupl were like 
needl, make on afraid of tread, or sit down, or 
eat.

when miss brook wa at the tea-tabl, sir jame came to sit down 
her, not have felt her mode of answer him at all offens. 
should he? he thought it probabl that miss brook like him, 
manner must be veri mark inde befor thei ceas to be 
by preconcept either confid or distrust. she wa 
charm to him, but of cours he theoriz a littl about 
attach. he wa made of excel human dough, and had the 
merit of know that hi talent, even if let loos, would not set 
smallest stream in the counti on fire: henc he like the prospect of 
wife to whom he could sai, “what shall we do?” about thi or that; 
could help her husband out with reason, and would also have 
properti qualif for do so. as to the excess 
alleg against miss brook, he had a veri indefinit notion of what 
consist in, and thought that it would die out with marriag. 
short, he felt himself to be in love in the right place, and wa 
to endur a great deal of predomin, which, after all, a man 
alwai put down when he like. sir jame had no idea that he 
ever like to put down the predomin of thi handsom girl, in 
clever he delight. why not? a man’s mind—what there is of it—
alwai the advantag of be masculin,—as the smallest birch-tree 
of a higher kind than the most soar palm,—and even hi ignor 
of a sounder qualiti. sir jame might not have origin 
estim; but a kind provid furnish the limpest person 
a littl gum or starch in the form of tradit.

“let me hope that you will rescind that resolut about the hors,
miss brook,” said the persev admir. “i assur you, ride 
the most healthi of exercis.”

“i am awar of it,” said dorothea, coldli. “i think it would do 
good—if she would take to it.”

“but you ar such a perfect horsewoman.”

“excus me; i have had veri littl practic, and i should be 
thrown.”

“then that is a reason for more practic. everi ladi ought to be 
perfect horsewoman, that she mai accompani her husband.”

“you see how wide we differ, sir jame. i have made up my mind that 
ought not to be a perfect horsewoman, and so i should never 
to your pattern of a ladi.” dorothea look straight befor her, 
spoke with cold brusqueri, veri much with the air of a handsom boi,
in amus contrast with the solicit amiabl of her admir.

“i should like to know your reason for thi cruel resolut. it 
not possibl that you should think horsemanship wrong.”

“it is quit possibl that i should think it wrong for me.”

“oh, why?” said sir jame, in a tender tone of remonstr.

mr. casaubon had come up to the tabl, teacup in hand, and 
listen.

“we must not inquir too curious into motiv,” he interpos, in 
measur wai. “miss brook know that thei ar apt to becom feebl 
the utter: the aroma is mix with the grosser air. we must 
the germin grain awai from the light.”

dorothea color with pleasur, and look up gratefulli to 
speaker. here wa a man who could understand the higher inward life,
and with whom there could be some spiritu communion; nai, who 
illumin principl with the widest knowledg: a man whose 
almost amount to a proof of whatev he believ!

dorothea’s infer mai seem larg; but realli life could never 
gone on at ani period but for thi liber allow of conclus,
which ha facilit marriag under the difficulti of civil.
ha ani on ever pinch into it pilul small the cobweb 
pre-matrimoni acquaintanceship?

“certainli,” said good sir jame. “miss brook shall not be urg 
tell reason she would rather be silent upon. i am sure her 
would do her honor.”

he wa not in the least jealou of the interest with which dorothea 
look up at mr. casaubon: it never occur to him that a girl to 
he wa medit an offer of marriag could care for a dri 
toward fifti, except, inde, in a religi sort of wai, as for 
clergyman of some distinct.

howev, sinc miss brook had becom engag in a convers 
mr. casaubon about the vaudoi clergi, sir jame betook himself 
celia, and talk to her about her sister; spoke of a hous in town,
and ask whether miss brook dislik london. awai from her sister,
celia talk quit easili, and sir jame said to himself that 
second miss brook wa certainli veri agreeabl as well as pretti,
though not, as some peopl pretend, more clever and sensibl than 
elder sister. he felt that he had chosen the on who wa in 
respect the superior; and a man natur like to look forward 
have the best. he would be the veri mawworm of bachelor 
pretend not to expect it.




chapter iii.

“sai, goddess, what ensu, when raphael,
the affabl archangel . . .
                    
the stori heard attent, and wa 
with admir, and deep muse, to 
of thing so high and strang.”
—_paradis lost_, b. vii.


if it had realli occur to mr. casaubon to think of miss brook as 
suitabl wife for him, the reason that might induc her to accept 
were alreadi plant in her mind, and by the even of the next 
the reason had bud and bloom. for thei had had a 
convers in the morn, while celia, who did not like the 
of mr. casaubon’s mole and sallow, had escap to the vicarag 
plai with the curat’s ill-shod but merri children.

dorothea by thi time had look deep into the ungaug reservoir 
mr. casaubon’s mind, see reflect there in vagu 
extens everi qualiti she herself brought; had open much of her 
experi to him, and had understood from him the scope of hi 
work, also of attract labyrinthin extent. for he had been 
instruct as milton’s “affabl archangel;” and with someth of 
archangel manner he told her how he had undertaken to show (
inde had been attempt befor, but not with that thorough,
justic of comparison, and effect of arrang at which mr.
casaubon aim) that all the mythic system or errat 
fragment in the world were corrupt of a tradit 
reveal. have onc master the true posit and taken a 
foot there, the vast field of mythic construct 
intellig, nai, lumin with the reflect light 
correspond. but to gather in thi great harvest of truth wa 
light or speedi work. hi note alreadi made a formid rang 
volum, but the crown task would be to condens these 
still-accumul result and bring them, like the earlier vintag 
hippocrat book, to fit a littl shelf. in explain thi 
dorothea, mr. casaubon express himself nearli as he would have 
to a fellow-student, for he had not two style of talk at command:
it is true that when he us a greek or latin phrase he alwai gave 
english with scrupul care, but he would probabl have done thi 
ani case. a learn provinci clergyman is accustom to think of 
acquaint as of “lord, knyght, and other nobl and worthi men,
that conn latyn but lytil.”

dorothea wa altogeth captiv by the wide embrac of 
concept. here wa someth beyond the shallow of ladi’ 
literatur: here wa a live bossuet, whose work would 
complet knowledg with devot pieti; here wa a modern augustin 
unit the glori of doctor and saint.

the sanctiti seem no less clearli mark than the learn, for 
dorothea wa impel to open her mind on certain theme which 
could speak of to no on whom she had befor seen at tipton, 
on the secondari import of ecclesiast form and articl 
belief compar with that spiritu religion, that submerg of 
in communion with divin perfect which seem to her to be 
in the best christian book of wide distant ag, she found in mr.
casaubon a listen who understood her at onc, who could assur her 
hi own agreement with that view when duli temper with 
conform, and could mention histor exampl befor unknown 
her.

“he think with me,” said dorothea to herself, “or rather, he think 
whole world of which my thought is but a poor twopenni mirror. and 
feel too, hi whole experi—what a lake compar with my 
pool!”

miss brook argu from word and disposit not less 
than other young ladi of her ag. sign ar small measur thing,
but interpret ar illimit, and in girl of sweet, 
natur, everi sign is apt to conjur up wonder, hope, belief, vast as 
sky, and color by a diffus thimbl of matter in the shape 
knowledg. thei ar not alwai too grossli deceiv; for sinbad 
mai have fallen by good-luck on a true descript, and wrong 
sometim land poor mortal in right conclus: start a long 
off the true point, and proceed by loop and zigzag, we now 
then arriv just where we ought to be. becaus miss brook wa hasti 
her trust, it is not therefor clear that mr. casaubon wa unworthi 
it.

he stai a littl longer than he had intend, on a slight pressur 
invit from mr. brook, who offer no bait except hi 
document on machin-break and rick-burn. mr. casaubon wa 
into the librari to look at these in a heap, while hi host pick 
first on and then the other to read aloud from in a skip 
uncertain wai, pass from on unfinish passag to anoth with 
“ye, now, but here!” and final push them all asid to open 
journal of hi youth continent travel.

“look here—here is all about greec. rhamnu, the ruin of rhamnu—
ar a great grecian, now. i don’t know whether you have given 
studi to the topographi. i spent no end of time in make out 
thing—helicon, now. here, now!—‘we start the next morn 
parnassu, the doubl-peak parnassu.’ all thi volum is 
greec, you know,” mr. brook wound up, rub hi thumb 
along the edg of the leav as he held the book forward.

mr. casaubon made a dignifi though somewhat sad audienc; bow 
the right place, and avoid look at anyth documentari as far 
possibl, without show disregard or impati; mind that 
desultori wa associ with the institut of the countri, 
that the man who took him on thi sever mental scamper wa not onli 
amiabl host, but a landhold and custo rotulorum. wa hi 
aid also by the reflect that mr. brook wa the uncl of dorothea?

certainli he seem more and more bent on make her talk to him, 
draw her out, as celia remark to herself; and in look at 
hi face wa often lit up by a smile like pale wintri sunshin. 
he left the next morn, while take a pleasant walk with miss 
along the gravel terrac, he had mention to her that he felt 
disadvantag of loneli, the need of that cheer 
with which the presenc of youth can lighten or vari the seriou 
of matur. and he deliv thi statement with as much 
precis as if he had been a diplomat envoi whose word would 
attend with result. inde, mr. casaubon wa not us to expect 
he should have to repeat or revis hi commun of a practic 
person kind. the inclin which he had deliber state on 
2d of octob he would think it enough to refer to by the mention 
that date; judg by the standard of hi own memori, which wa 
volum where a vide supra could serv instead of repetit, and 
the ordinari long-us blot-book which onli tell of 
write. but in thi case mr. casaubon’s confid wa not like 
be falsifi, for dorothea heard and retain what he said with 
eager interest of a fresh young natur to which everi varieti 
experi is an epoch.

it wa three o’clock in the beauti breezi autumn dai when mr.
casaubon drove off to hi rectori at lowick, onli five mile 
tipton; and dorothea, who had on her bonnet and shawl, hurri 
the shrubberi and across the park that she might wander through 
border wood with no other visibl companionship than that of monk,
the great st. bernard dog, who alwai took care of the young ladi 
their walk. there had risen befor her the girl’s vision of a 
futur for herself to which she look forward with trembl hope, 
she want to wander on in that visionari futur without interrupt.
she walk briskli in the brisk air, the color rose in her cheek, 
her straw bonnet (which our contemporari might look at 
conjectur curios as at an obsolet form of basket) fell a 
backward. she would perhap be hardli character enough if it 
omit that she wore her brown hair flatli braid and coil 
so as to expos the outlin of her head in a dare manner at a 
when public feel requir the meagr of natur to 
dissimul by tall barricad of frizz curl and bow, 
surpass by ani great race except the feejeean. thi wa a trait 
miss brook’s ascetic. but there wa noth of an ascet’
express in her bright full ey, as she look befor her, 
conscious see, but absorb into the intens of her mood, 
solemn glori of the afternoon with it long swath of light 
the far-off row of lime, whose shadow touch each other.

all peopl, young or old (that is, all peopl in those ant-
time), would have thought her an interest object if thei 
refer the glow in her ey and cheek to the newli awaken 
imag of young love: the illus of chloe about strephon have 
suffici consecr in poetri, as the pathet loveli of 
spontan trust ought to be. miss pippin ador young pumpkin, 
dream along endless vista of unweari companionship, wa a 
drama which never tire our father and mother, and had been put 
all costum. let but pumpkin have a figur which would sustain 
disadvantag of the shortwaist swallow-tail, and everybodi felt 
not onli natur but necessari to the perfect of womanhood, that 
sweet girl should be at onc convinc of hi virtu, hi 
abil, and abov all, hi perfect sincer. but perhap no 
then live—certainli none in the neighborhood of tipton—would have 
a sympathet understand for the dream of a girl whose 
about marriag took their color entir from an exalt 
about the end of life, an enthusiasm which wa lit chiefli by it 
fire, and includ neither the niceti of the trousseau, the 
of plate, nor even the honor and sweet joi of the bloom matron.

it had now enter dorothea’s mind that mr. casaubon might wish to 
her hi wife, and the idea that he would do so touch her with a 
of reverenti gratitud. how good of him—nai, it would be almost as 
a wing messeng had suddenli stood besid her path and held out 
hand toward her! for a long while she had been oppress by 
indefinit which hung in her mind, like a thick summer haze, 
all her desir to make her life greatli effect. what could she do,
what ought she to do?—she, hardli more than a bud woman, but 
with an activ conscienc and a great mental need, not to be 
by a girlish instruct compar to the nibbl and judgment of 
discurs mous. with some endow of stupid and conceit, 
might have thought that a christian young ladi of fortun should 
her ideal of life in villag chariti, patronag of the 
clergi, the perus of “femal scriptur charact,” unfold 
privat experi of sara under the old dispens, and dorca 
the new, and the care of her soul over her embroideri in her 
boudoir—with a background of prospect marriag to a man who, if 
strict than herself, as be involv in affair 
inexplic, might be prai for and season exhort. from 
content poor dorothea wa shut out. the intens of her 
disposit, the coercion it exercis over her life, wa but 
aspect of a natur altogeth ardent, theoret, and 
consequ: and with such a natur struggl in the band of a 
teach, hem in by a social life which seem noth but 
labyrinth of petti cours, a wall-in maze of small path that led 
whither, the outcom wa sure to strike other as at onc 
and inconsist. the thing which seem to her best, she want 
justifi by the completest knowledg; and not to live in a 
admiss of rule which were never act on. into thi soul-hunger 
yet all her youth passion wa pour; the union which attract 
wa on that would deliv her from her girlish subject to her 
ignor, and give her the freedom of voluntari submiss to a 
who would take her along the grandest path.

“i should learn everyth then,” she said to herself, still 
quickli along the bridl road through the wood. “it would be my duti 
studi that i might help him the better in hi great work. there 
be noth trivial about our live. everi-dai thing with us would 
the greatest thing. it would be like marri pascal. i should 
to see the truth by the same light as great men have seen it by. 
then i should know what to do, when i got older: i should see how 
wa possibl to lead a grand life here—now—in england. i don’t 
sure about do good in ani wai now: everyth seem like go on 
mission to a peopl whose languag i don’t know;—unless it 
build good cottag—there can be no doubt about that. oh, i hope 
should be abl to get the peopl well hous in lowick! i will 
plenti of plan while i have time.”

dorothea check herself suddenli with self-rebuk for the 
wai in which she wa reckon on uncertain event, but she wa 
ani inward effort to chang the direct of her thought by 
appear of a canter horseman round a turn of the road. 
well-groom chestnut hors and two beauti setter could leav 
doubt that the rider wa sir jame chettam. he discern dorothea,
jump off hi hors at onc, and, have deliv it to hi groom,
advanc toward her with someth white on hi arm, at which the 
setter were bark in an excit manner.

“how delight to meet you, miss brook,” he said, rais hi hat 
show hi sleekli wave blond hair. “it ha hasten the pleasur 
wa look forward to.”

miss brook wa annoi at the interrupt. thi amiabl baronet,
realli a suitabl husband for celia, exagger the necess 
make himself agreeabl to the elder sister. even a 
brother-in-law mai be an oppress if he will alwai be 
too good an understand with you, and agre with you even when 
contradict him. the thought that he had made the mistak of pai 
address to herself could not take shape: all her mental activ 
us up in persuas of anoth kind. but he wa posit 
at thi moment, and hi dimpl hand were quit disagre. 
rous temper made her color deepli, as she return hi greet 
some haughti.

sir jame interpret the heighten color in the wai most 
to himself, and thought he never saw miss brook look so handsom.

“i have brought a littl petition,” he said, “or rather, i 
brought him to see if he will be approv befor hi petit 
offer.” he show the white object under hi arm, which wa a 
maltes puppi, on of natur’s most naiv toi.

“it is pain to me to see these creatur that ar bred mere 
pet,” said dorothea, whose opinion wa form itself that veri 
(as opinion will) under the heat of irrit.

“oh, why?” said sir jame, as thei walk forward.

“i believ all the pet that is given them doe not make them happi.
thei ar too helpless: their live ar too frail. a weasel or a 
that get it own live is more interest. i like to think that 
anim about us have soul someth like our own, and either carri 
their own littl affair or can be companion to us, like monk here.
those creatur ar parasit.”

“i am so glad i know that you do not like them,” said good sir jame.
“i should never keep them for myself, but ladi usual ar fond 
these maltes dog. here, john, take thi dog, will you?”

the objection puppi, whose nose and ey were equal black 
express, wa thu got rid of, sinc miss brook decid that it 
better not have been born. but she felt it necessari to explain.

“you must not judg of celia’s feel from mine. i think she 
these small pet. she had a tini terrier onc, which she wa veri 
of. it made me unhappi, becaus i wa afraid of tread on it. i 
rather short-sight.”

“you have your own opinion about everyth, miss brook, and it 
alwai a good opinion.”

what answer wa possibl to such stupid compliment?

“do you know, i envi you that,” sir jame said, as thei 
walk at the rather brisk pace set by dorothea.

“i don’t quit understand what you mean.”

“your power of form an opinion. i can form an opinion of person. 
know when i like peopl. but about other matter, do you know, i 
often a difficulti in decid. on hear veri sensibl thing said 
opposit side.”

“or that seem sensibl. perhap we don’t alwai discrimin 
sens and nonsens.”

dorothea felt that she wa rather rude.

“exactli,” said sir jame. “but you seem to have the power 
discrimin.”

“on the contrari, i am often unabl to decid. but that is 
ignor. the right conclus is there all the same, though i 
unabl to see it.”

“i think there ar few who would see it more readili. do you know,
lovegood wa tell me yesterdai that you had the best notion in 
world of a plan for cottag—quit wonder for a young ladi, 
thought. you had a real _genu_, to us hi express. he said 
want mr. brook to build a new set of cottag, but he seem 
think it hardli probabl that your uncl would consent. do you know,
that is on of the thing i wish to do—i mean, on my own estat. 
should be so glad to carri out that plan of your, if you would let 
see it. of cours, it is sink monei; that is why peopl object 
it. labor can never pai rent to make it answer. but, after all, 
is worth do.”

“worth do! ye, inde,” said dorothea, energet, 
her previou small vexat. “i think we deserv to be beaten out 
our beauti hous with a scourg of small cord—all of us who 
tenant live in such sti as we see round us. life in cottag 
be happier than our, if thei were real hous fit for human 
from whom we expect duti and affect.”

“will you show me your plan?”

“ye, certainli. i dare sai it is veri faulti. but i have 
examin all the plan for cottag in loudon’s book, and pick 
what seem the best thing. oh what a happi it would be to set 
pattern about here! i think instead of lazaru at the gate, we 
put the pigsti cottag outsid the park-gate.”

dorothea wa in the best temper now. sir jame, as brother in-law,
build model cottag on hi estat, and then, perhap, other 
built at lowick, and more and more elsewher in imit—it would 
as if the spirit of oberlin had pass over the parish to make 
life of poverti beauti!

sir jame saw all the plan, and took on awai to consult upon 
lovegood. he also took awai a complac sens that he wa make 
progress in miss brook’s good opinion. the maltes puppi wa 
offer to celia; an omiss which dorothea afterward thought of 
surpris; but she blame herself for it. she had been engross 
jame. after all, it wa a relief that there wa no puppi to 
upon.

celia wa present while the plan were be examin, and observ 
jame’s illus. “he think that dodo care about him, and she 
care about her plan. yet i am not certain that she would refus 
if she thought he would let her manag everyth and carri out all 
notion. and how veri uncomfort sir jame would be! i cannot 
notion.”

it wa celia’s privat luxuri to indulg in thi dislik. she dare 
confess it to her sister in ani direct statement, for that would 
lai herself open to a demonstr that she wa somehow or other 
war with all good. but on safe opportun, she had an 
mode of make her neg wisdom tell upon dorothea, and call 
down from her rhapsod mood by remind her that peopl were stare,
not listen. celia wa not impuls: what she had to sai could wait,
and came from her alwai with the same quiet staccato even. 
peopl talk with energi and emphasi she watch their face 
featur mere. she never could understand how well-bred 
consent to sing and open their mouth in the ridicul 
requisit for that vocal exercis.

it wa not mani dai befor mr. casaubon paid a morn visit, on 
he wa invit again for the follow week to dine and stai the night.
thu dorothea had three more convers with him, and wa 
that her first impress had been just. he wa all she had at 
imagin him to be: almost everyth he had said seem like 
specimen from a mine, or the inscript on the door of a museum 
might open on the treasur of past ag; and thi trust in hi 
wealth wa all the deeper and more effect on her inclin 
it wa now obviou that hi visit were made for her sake. 
accomplish man condescend to think of a young girl, and take 
pain to talk to her, not with absurd compliment, but with an appeal 
her understand, and sometim with instruct correct. 
delight companionship! mr. casaubon seem even unconsci 
trivial exist, and never hand round that small-talk of 
men which is as accept as stale bride-cake brought forth with 
odor of cupboard. he talk of what he wa interest in, or els 
wa silent and bow with sad civil. to dorothea thi wa 
genuin, and religi abstin from that artifici 
us up the soul in the effort of pretenc. for she look 
rever at mr. casaubon’s religi elev abov herself as 
did at hi intellect and learn. he assent to her express 
devout feel, and usual with an appropri quotat; he 
himself to sai that he had gone through some spiritu conflict in 
youth; in short, dorothea saw that here she might reckon 
understand, sympathi, and guidanc. on on—onli on—of her 
theme she wa disappoint. mr. casaubon appar did not care 
build cottag, and divert the talk to the extrem 
accommod which wa to be had in the dwell of the 
egyptian, as if to check a too high standard. after he wa gone,
dorothea dwelt with some agit on thi indiffer of hi; and 
mind wa much exercis with argument drawn from the 
condit of climat which modifi human need, and from the 
wicked of pagan despot. should she not urg these argument on mr.
casaubon when he came again? but further reflect told her that 
wa presumptu in demand hi attent to such a subject; he 
not disapprov of her occupi herself with it in leisur moment, 
other women expect to occupi themselv with their dress 
embroideri—would not forbid it when—dorothea felt rather asham as 
detect herself in these specul. but her uncl had been 
to go to lowick to stai a coupl of dai: wa it reason to 
that mr. casaubon delight in mr. brook’s societi for it own sake,
either with or without document?

meanwhil that littl disappoint made her delight the more in 
jame chettam’s readi to set on foot the desir improv. 
came much often than mr. casaubon, and dorothea ceas to find 
disagre sinc he show himself so entir in earnest; for he 
alreadi enter with much practic abil into lovegood’s estim,
and wa charmingli docil. she propos to build a coupl of cottag,
and transfer two famili from their old cabin, which could then 
pull down, so that new on could be built on the old site. 
jame said “exactli,” and she bore the word remark well.

certainli these men who had so few spontan idea might be 
us member of societi under good feminin direct, if thei 
fortun in choos their sister-in-law! it is difficult to 
whether there wa or wa not a littl wil in her 
blind to the possibl that anoth sort of choic wa in question 
relat to her. but her life wa just now full of hope and action: 
wa not onli think of her plan, but get down learn book 
the librari and read mani thing hastili (that she might be a 
less ignor in talk to mr. casaubon), all the while be 
with conscienti question whether she were not exalt 
poor do abov measur and contempl them with 
self-satisfact which wa the last doom of ignor and folli.




chapter iv.

1_st gent_. our deed ar fetter that we forg ourselv.

2_d gent._ ay, truli: but i think it is the 
that bring the iron.


“sir jame seem determin to do everyth you wish,” said celia, 
thei were drive home from an inspect of the new build-site.

“he is a good creatur, and more sensibl than ani on would imagin,”
said dorothea, inconsider.

“you mean that he appear silli.”

“no, no,” said dorothea, recollect herself, and lai her hand 
her sister’s a moment, “but he doe not talk equal well on 
subject.”

“i should think none but disagre peopl do,” said celia, in 
usual pur wai. “thei must be veri dread to live with. 
think! at breakfast, and alwai.”

dorothea laugh. “o kitti, you ar a wonder creatur!” she 
celia’s chin, be in the mood now to think her veri win 
love—fit hereaft to be an etern cherub, and if it were 
doctrin wrong to sai so, hardli more in need of salvat than 
squirrel. “of cours peopl need not be alwai talk well. onli 
tell the qualiti of their mind when thei try to talk well.”

“you mean that sir jame tri and fail.”

“i wa speak gener. why do you catechis me about sir jame? 
is not the object of hi life to pleas me.”

“now, dodo, can you realli believ that?”

“certainli. he think of me as a futur sister—that is all.” 
had never hint thi befor, wait, from a certain shyness on 
subject which wa mutual between the sister, until it should 
introduc by some decis event. celia blush, but said at onc—

“prai do not make that mistak ani longer, dodo. when tantripp 
brush my hair the other dai, she said that sir jame’s man knew 
mr. cadwallad’s maid that sir jame wa to marri the eldest 
brook.”

“how can you let tantripp talk such gossip to you, celia?” 
dorothea, indignantli, not the less angri becaus detail asleep in 
memori were now awaken to confirm the unwelcom revel. “you 
have ask her question. it is degrad.”

“i see no harm at all in tantripp’s talk to me. it is better to 
what peopl sai. you see what mistak you make by take up notion. 
am quit sure that sir jame mean to make you an offer; and 
believ that you will accept him, especi sinc you have been 
pleas with him about the plan. and uncl too—i know he expect it.
everi on can see that sir jame is veri much in love with you.”

the revuls wa so strong and pain in dorothea’s mind that 
tear well up and flow abundantli. all her dear plan 
embitt, and she thought with disgust of sir jame’s conceiv 
she recogn him as her lover. there wa vexat too on account 
celia.

“how could he expect it?” she burst forth in her most impetu manner.
“i have never agre with him about anyth but the cottag: i 
bare polit to him befor.”

“but you have been so pleas with him sinc then; he ha begun to 
quit sure that you ar fond of him.”

“fond of him, celia! how can you choos such odiou express?” 
dorothea, passion.

“dear me, dorothea, i suppos it would be right for you to be fond of 
man whom you accept for a husband.”

“it is offens to me to sai that sir jame could think i wa fond 
him. besid, it is not the right word for the feel i must 
toward the man i would accept as a husband.”

“well, i am sorri for sir jame. i thought it right to tell you,
becaus you went on as you alwai do, never look just where you ar,
and tread in the wrong place. you alwai see what nobodi els see;
it is imposs to satisfi you; yet you never see what is quit plain.
that’s your wai, dodo.” someth certainli gave celia unusu courag;
and she wa not spare the sister of whom she wa occasion in aw.
who can tell what just critic murr the cat mai be pass on 
be of wider specul?

“it is veri pain,” said dorothea, feel scourg. “i can have 
more to do with the cottag. i must be uncivil to him. i must tell 
i will have noth to do with them. it is veri pain.” her 
fill again with tear.

“wait a littl. think about it. you know he is go awai for a dai 
two to see hi sister. there will be nobodi besid lovegood.” 
could not help relent. “poor dodo,” she went on, in an 
staccato. “it is veri hard: it is your favorit _fad_ to draw plan.”

“_fad_ to draw plan! do you think i onli care about 
fellow-creatur’ hous in that childish wai? i mai well 
mistak. how can on ever do anyth nobli christian, live 
peopl with such petti thought?”

no more wa said; dorothea wa too much jar to recov her 
and behav so as to show that she admit ani error in herself. 
wa dispos rather to accus the intoler narrow and 
purblind conscienc of the societi around her: and celia wa no 
the etern cherub, but a thorn in her spirit, a pink-and-
nullifidian, wors than ani discourag presenc in the “pilgrim’
progress.” the _fad_ of draw plan! what wa life worth—what 
faith wa possibl when the whole effect of on’s action could 
wither up into such parch rubbish as that? when she got out of 
carriag, her cheek were pale and her eyelid red. she wa an imag 
sorrow, and her uncl who met her in the hall would have been alarm,
if celia had not been close to her look so pretti and compos, 
he at onc conclud dorothea’s tear to have their origin in 
excess religi. he had return, dure their absenc, from 
journei to the counti town, about a petit for the pardon of 
crimin.

“well, my dear,” he said, kindli, as thei went up to kiss him, “i 
noth disagre ha happen while i have been awai.”

“no, uncl,” said celia, “we have been to freshitt to look at 
cottag. we thought you would have been at home to lunch.”

“i came by lowick to lunch—you didn’t know i came by lowick. and i 
brought a coupl of pamphlet for you, dorothea—in the librari, 
know; thei lie on the tabl in the librari.”

it seem as if an electr stream went through dorothea, thrill 
from despair into expect. thei were pamphlet about the 
church. the oppress of celia, tantripp, and sir jame wa 
off, and she walk straight to the librari. celia went up-stair. mr.
brook wa detain by a messag, but when he re-enter the librari,
he found dorothea seat and alreadi deep in on of the pamphlet 
had some margin manuscript of mr. casaubon’s,—take it in as 
as she might have taken in the scent of a fresh bouquet after a dry,
hot, dreari walk.

she wa get awai from tipton and freshitt, and her own 
liabil to tread in the wrong place on her wai to the new jerusalem.

mr. brook sat down in hi arm-chair, stretch hi leg toward 
wood-fire, which had fallen into a wondrou mass of glow 
between the dog, and rub hi hand gentli, look veri 
toward dorothea, but with a neutral leisur air, as if he 
noth particular to sai. dorothea close her pamphlet, as soon as 
wa awar of her uncl’s presenc, and rose as if to go. usual 
would have been interest about her uncl’s merci errand on 
of the crimin, but her late agit had made her absent-mind.

“i came back by lowick, you know,” said mr. brook, not as if with 
intent to arrest her departur, but appar from hi 
tendenc to sai what he had said befor. thi fundament principl 
human speech wa markedli exhibit in mr. brook. “i lunch there 
saw casaubon’s librari, and that kind of thing. there’s a sharp air,
drive. won’t you sit down, my dear? you look cold.”

dorothea felt quit inclin to accept the invit. some time, 
her uncl’s easi wai of take thing did not happen to 
exasper, it wa rather sooth. she threw off her mantl 
bonnet, and sat down opposit to him, enjoi the glow, but lift 
her beauti hand for a screen. thei were not thin hand, or 
hand; but power, feminin, matern hand. she seem to be 
them up in propiti for her passion desir to know and to think,
which in the unfriendli medium of tipton and freshitt had issu 
cry and red eyelid.

she bethought herself now of the condemn crimin. “what new 
you brought about the sheep-stealer, uncl?”

“what, poor bunch?—well, it seem we can’t get him off—he is to 
hang.”

dorothea’s brow took an express of reprob and piti.

“hang, you know,” said mr. brook, with a quiet nod. “poor romilli!
he would have help us. i knew romilli. casaubon didn’t know romilli.
he is a littl buri in book, you know, casaubon is.”

“when a man ha great studi and is write a great work, he must 
cours give up see much of the world. how can he go about 
acquaint?”

“that’s true. but a man mope, you know. i have alwai been a 
too, but i have that sort of disposit that i never mope; it wa 
wai to go about everywher and take in everyth. i never mope: but 
can see that casaubon doe, you know. he want a companion—a companion,
you know.”

“it would be a great honor to ani on to be hi companion,” 
dorothea, energet.

“you like him, eh?” said mr. brook, without show ani surpris, 
other emot. “well, now, i’ve known casaubon ten year, ever sinc 
came to lowick. but i never got anyth out of him—ani idea, 
know. howev, he is a tiptop man and mai be a bishop—that kind 
thing, you know, if peel stai in. and he ha a veri high opinion 
you, my dear.”

dorothea could not speak.

“the fact is, he ha a veri high opinion inde of you. and he 
uncommonli well—doe casaubon. he ha defer to me, you not be 
ag. in short, i have promis to speak to you, though i told him 
thought there wa not much chanc. i wa bound to tell him that. 
said, my niec is veri young, and that kind of thing. but i didn’
think it necessari to go into everyth. howev, the long and 
short of it is, that he ha ask my permiss to make you an offer 
marriag—of marriag, you know,” said mr. brook, with hi 
nod. “i thought it better to tell you, my dear.”

no on could have detect ani anxieti in mr. brook’s manner, but 
did realli wish to know someth of hi niec’s mind, that, if 
were ani need for advic, he might give it in time. what feel he, 
a magistr who had taken in so mani idea, could make room for, 
unmixedli kind. sinc dorothea did not speak immedi, he repeat,
“i thought it better to tell you, my dear.”

“thank you, uncl,” said dorothea, in a clear unwav tone. “i 
veri grate to mr. casaubon. if he make me an offer, i shall 
him. i admir and honor him more than ani man i ever saw.”

mr. brook paus a littl, and then said in a linger low tone, “ah?
… well! he is a good match in some respect. but now, chettam is a 
match. and our land li togeth. i shall never interfer against 
wish, my dear. peopl should have their own wai in marriag, and 
sort of thing—up to a certain point, you know. i have alwai said that,
up to a certain point. i wish you to marri well; and i have good 
to believ that chettam wish to marri you. i mention it, you know.”

“it is imposs that i should ever marri sir jame chettam,” 
dorothea. “if he think of marri me, he ha made a great mistak.”

“that is it, you see. on never know. i should have thought 
wa just the sort of man a woman would like, now.”

“prai do not mention him in that light again, uncl,” said dorothea,
feel some of her late irrit reviv.

mr. brook wonder, and felt that women were an inexhaust 
of studi, sinc even he at hi ag wa not in a perfect state 
scientif predict about them. here wa a fellow like chettam 
no chanc at all.

“well, but casaubon, now. there is no hurri—i mean for you. it’s true,
everi year will tell upon him. he is over five-and-forti, you know. 
should sai a good seven-and-twenti year older than you. to be sure,—
you like learn and stand, and that sort of thing, we can’t 
everyth. and hi incom is good—he ha a handsom 
independ of the church—hi incom is good. still he is not young,
and i must not conceal from you, my dear, that i think hi health 
not over-strong. i know noth els against him.”

“i should not wish to have a husband veri near my own ag,” 
dorothea, with grave decis. “i should wish to have a husband who 
abov me in judgment and in all knowledg.”

mr. brook repeat hi subdu, “ah?—i thought you had more of 
own opinion than most girl. i thought you like your own opinion—
it, you know.”

“i cannot imagin myself live without some opinion, but i 
wish to have good reason for them, and a wise man could help me to 
which opinion had the best foundat, and would help me to 
accord to them.”

“veri true. you couldn’t put the thing better—couldn’t put it better,
beforehand, you know. but there ar odditi in thing,” continu mr.
brook, whose conscienc wa realli rous to do the best he could 
hi niec on thi occas. “life isn’t cast in a mould—not cut out 
rule and line, and that sort of thing. i never marri myself, and 
will be the better for you and your. the fact is, i never love 
on well enough to put myself into a noos for them. it _is_ a noos,
you know. temper, now. there is temper. and a husband like to 
master.”

“i know that i must expect trial, uncl. marriag is a state of 
duti. i never thought of it as mere person eas,” said 
dorothea.

“well, you ar not fond of show, a great establish, ball, dinner,
that kind of thing. i can see that casaubon’s wai might suit 
better than chettam’s. and you shall do as you like, my dear. i 
not hinder casaubon; i said so at onc; for there is no know 
anyth mai turn out. you have not the same tast as everi 
ladi; and a clergyman and scholar—who mai be a bishop—that kind 
thing—mai suit you better than chettam. chettam is a good fellow, 
good sound-heart fellow, you know; but he doesn’t go much into idea.
i did, when i wa hi ag. but casaubon’s ey, now. i think he 
hurt them a littl with too much read.”

“i should be all the happier, uncl, the more room there wa for me 
help him,” said dorothea, ardent.

“you have quit made up your mind, i see. well, my dear, the fact is, 
have a letter for you in my pocket.” mr. brook hand the letter 
dorothea, but as she rose to go awai, he ad, “there is not too 
hurri, my dear. think about it, you know.”

when dorothea had left him, he reflect that he had certainli 
strongli: he had put the risk of marriag befor her in a 
manner. it wa hi duti to do so. but as to pretend to be wise 
young peopl,—no uncl, howev much he had travel in hi youth,
absorb the new idea, and dine with celebr now deceas, 
pretend to judg what sort of marriag would turn out well for a 
girl who prefer casaubon to chettam. in short, woman wa a 
which, sinc mr. brook’s mind felt blank befor it, could be 
less complic than the revolut of an irregular solid.




chapter v.

“hard student ar commonli troubl with gowt, catarrh, rheum,
cachexia, bradypepsia, bad ey, stone, and collick, cruditi,
oppil, vertigo, wind, consumpt, and all such diseas 
come by over-much sit: thei ar most part lean, dry, ill-color …
and all through immoder pain and extraordinari studi. if you 
not believ the truth of thi, look upon great tostatu and 
aquaina’ work; and tell me whether those men took pain.”—burton’
_anatomi of melancholi_, p. i, s. 2.


thi wa mr. casaubon’s letter.

my dear miss brook,—i have your guardian’s permiss to address 
on a subject than which i have none more at heart. i am not, i trust,
mistaken in the recognit of some deeper correspond than that 
date in the fact that a conscious of need in my own life had 
contemporan with the possibl of my becom acquaint 
you. for in the first hour of meet you, i had an impress of 
emin and perhap exclus fit to suppli that need (connect, 
mai sai, with such activ of the affect as even 
preoccup of a work too special to be abdic could 
uninterruptedli dissimul); and each succeed opportun 
observ ha given the impress an ad depth by convinc 
more emphat of that fit which i had preconceiv, and 
evok more decis those affect to which i have but 
refer. our convers have, i think, made suffici clear 
you the tenor of my life and purpos: a tenor unsuit, i am awar, 
the common order of mind. but i have discern in you an 
of thought and a capabl of devoted, which i had hitherto 
conceiv to be compat either with the earli bloom of youth or 
those grace of sex that mai be said at onc to win and to 
distinct when combin, as thei notabl ar in you, with the 
qualiti abov indic. it wa, i confess, beyond my hope to 
with thi rare combin of element both solid and attract,
adapt to suppli aid in graver labor and to cast a charm over 
hour; and but for the event of my introduct to you (which, let 
again sai, i trust not to be superfici coincid 
foreshadow need, but providenti relat thereto as 
toward the complet of a life’s plan), i should presum have 
on to the last without ani attempt to lighten my solitari by 
matrimoni union.
    such, my dear miss brook, is the accur statement of 
    feel; and i reli on your kind indulg in ventur now 
    ask you how far your own ar of a natur to confirm my 
    presenti. to be accept by you as your husband and the 
    guardian of your welfar, i should regard as the highest 
    providenti gift. in return i can at least offer you an 
    hitherto unwast, and the faith consecr of a life which,
    howev short in the sequel, ha no backward page whereon, if 
    choos to turn them, you will find record such as might 
    caus you either bitter or shame. i await the express 
    your sentiment with an anxieti which it would be the part 
    wisdom (were it possibl) to divert by a more arduou labor 
    usual. but in thi order of experi i am still young, and 
    look forward to an unfavor possibl i cannot but 
    that resign to solitud will be more difficult after 
    temporari illumin of hope.


in ani case, i shall remain,
    your with sincer devot,
        edward casaubon.


dorothea trembl while she read thi letter; then she fell on 
knee, buri her face, and sob. she could not prai: under the 
of solemn emot in which thought becam vagu and imag 
uncertainli, she could but cast herself, with a childlik sens 
reclin, in the lap of a divin conscious which sustain 
own. she remain in that attitud till it wa time to dress 
dinner.

how could it occur to her to examin the letter, to look at 
critic as a profess of love? her whole soul wa possess by 
fact that a fuller life wa open befor her: she wa a 
about to enter on a higher grade of initi. she wa go to 
room for the energi which stir uneasili under the dim 
pressur of her own ignor and the petti peremptori of 
world’s habit.

now she would be abl to devot herself to larg yet definit duti;
now she would be allow to live continu in the light of a 
that she could rever. thi hope wa not unmix with the glow 
proud delight—the joyou maiden surpris that she wa chosen by the 
whom her admir had chosen. all dorothea’s passion wa 
through a mind struggl toward an ideal life; the radianc of 
transfigur girlhood fell on the first object that came within 
level. the impetu with which inclin becam resolut 
heighten by those littl event of the dai which had rous 
discont with the actual condit of her life.

after dinner, when celia wa plai an “air, with variat,” a 
kind of tinkl which symbol the aesthet part of the 
ladi’ educ, dorothea went up to her room to answer mr.
casaubon’s letter. why should she defer the answer? she wrote it 
three time, not becaus she wish to chang the word, but 
her hand wa unusu uncertain, and she could not bear that mr.
casaubon should think her handwrit bad and illeg. she 
herself on write a hand in which each letter wa 
without ani larg rang of conjectur, and she meant to make much 
of thi accomplish, to save mr. casaubon’s ey. three time 
wrote.

my dear mr. casaubon,—i am veri grate to you for love me, 
think me worthi to be your wife. i can look forward to no 
happi than that which would be on with your. if i said more, 
would onli be the same thing written out at greater length, for 
cannot now dwell on ani other thought than that i mai be through 


your devotedli,
    dorothea brook.


later in the even she follow her uncl into the librari to 
him the letter, that he might send it in the morn. he wa surpris,
but hi surpris onli issu in a few moment’ silenc, dure which 
push about variou object on hi write-tabl, and final 
with hi back to the fire, hi glass on hi nose, look at 
address of dorothea’s letter.

“have you thought enough about thi, my dear?” he said at last.

“there wa no need to think long, uncl. i know of noth to make 
vacil. if i chang my mind, it must be becaus of 
import and entir new to me.”

“ah!—then you have accept him? then chettam ha no chanc? 
chettam offend you—offend you, you know? what is it you don’t 
in chettam?”

“there is noth that i like in him,” said dorothea, 
impetu.

mr. brook threw hi head and shoulder backward as if some on 
thrown a light missil at him. dorothea immedi felt 
self-rebuk, and said—

“i mean in the light of a husband. he is veri kind, i think—realli 
good about the cottag. a well-mean man.”

“but you must have a scholar, and that sort of thing? well, it li 
littl in our famili. i had it myself—that love of knowledg, and 
into everyth—a littl too much—it took me too far; though that 
of thing doesn’t often run in the femal-line; or it run 
like the river in greec, you know—it come out in the son. 
son, clever mother. i went a good deal into that, at on time.
howev, my dear, i have alwai said that peopl should do as thei 
in these thing, up to a certain point. i couldn’t, as your guardian,
have consent to a bad match. but casaubon stand well: hi 
is good. i am afraid chettam will be hurt, though, and mr. 
will blame me.”

that even, of cours, celia knew noth of what had happen. 
attribut dorothea’s abstract manner, and the evid of 
cry sinc thei had got home, to the temper she had been in about 
jame chettam and the build, and wa care not to give 
offenc: have onc said what she want to sai, celia had 
disposit to recur to disagre subject. it had been her 
when a child never to quarrel with ani on—onli to observ with 
that thei quarrel with her, and look like turkei-cock; 
she wa readi to plai at cat’s cradl with them whenev thei 
themselv. and as to dorothea, it had alwai been her wai to 
someth wrong in her sister’s word, though celia inwardli 
that she alwai said just how thing were, and noth els: she 
did and never could put word togeth out of her own head. but 
best of dodo wa, that she did not keep angri for long togeth. now,
though thei had hardli spoken to each other all the even, yet 
celia put by her work, intend to go to bed, a proceed in 
she wa alwai much the earlier, dorothea, who wa seat on a 
stool, unabl to occupi herself except in medit, said, with 
music inton which in moment of deep but quiet feel made 
speech like a fine bit of recit—

“celia, dear, come and kiss me,” hold her arm open as she spoke.

celia knelt down to get the right level and gave her littl 
kiss, while dorothea encircl her with gentl arm and press 
lip grave on each cheek in turn.

“don’t sit up, dodo, you ar so pale to-night: go to bed soon,” 
celia, in a comfort wai, without ani touch of patho.

“no, dear, i am veri, veri happi,” said dorothea, fervent.

“so much the better,” thought celia. “but how strang dodo goe 
on extrem to the other.”

the next dai, at luncheon, the butler, hand someth to mr. brook,
said, “jona is come back, sir, and ha brought thi letter.”

mr. brook read the letter, and then, nod toward dorothea, said,
“casaubon, my dear: he will be here to dinner; he didn’t wait to 
more—didn’t wait, you know.”

it could not seem remark to celia that a dinner guest should 
announc to her sister beforehand, but, her ey follow the 
direct as her uncl’s, she wa struck with the peculiar effect 
the announc on dorothea. it seem as if someth like 
reflect of a white sunlit wing had pass across her featur,
end in on of her rare blush. for the first time it enter 
celia’s mind that there might be someth more between mr. 
and her sister than hi delight in bookish talk and her delight 
listen. hitherto she had class the admir for thi “ugli” 
learn acquaint with the admir for monsieur liret 
lausann, also ugli and learn. dorothea had never been tire 
listen to old monsieur liret when celia’s feet were as cold 
possibl, and when it had realli becom dread to see the skin of 
bald head move about. why then should her enthusiasm not extend 
mr. casaubon simpli in the same wai as to monsieur liret? and it 
probabl that all learn men had a sort of schoolmast’s view 
young peopl.

but now celia wa realli startl at the suspicion which had 
into her mind. she wa seldom taken by surpris in thi wai, 
marvel quick in observ a certain order of sign 
prepar her to expect such outward event as she had an interest in.
not that she now imagin mr. casaubon to be alreadi an accept lover:
she had onli begun to feel disgust at the possibl that anyth 
dorothea’s mind could tend toward such an issu. here wa 
realli to vex her about dodo: it wa all veri well not to accept 
jame chettam, but the idea of marri mr. casaubon! celia felt a 
of shame mingl with a sens of the ludicr. but perhap dodo, 
she were realli border on such an extravag, might be turn 
from it: experi had often shown that her impress might 
calcul on. the dai wa damp, and thei were not go to walk out,
so thei both went up to their sit-room; and there celia 
that dorothea, instead of settl down with her usual 
interest to some occup, simpli lean her elbow on an open 
and look out of the window at the great cedar silver with the damp.
she herself had taken up the make of a toi for the curat’s children,
and wa not go to enter on ani subject too precipit.

dorothea wa in fact think that it wa desir for celia to 
of the moment chang in mr. casaubon’s posit sinc he had 
been in the hous: it did not seem fair to leav her in ignor 
what would necessarili affect her attitud toward him; but it 
imposs not to shrink from tell her. dorothea accus herself 
some mean in thi timid: it wa alwai odiou to her to have 
small fear or contriv about her action, but at thi moment 
wa seek the highest aid possibl that she might not dread 
corros of celia’s pretti carnal mind prose. her reveri 
broken, and the difficulti of decis banish, by celia’s small 
rather guttur voic speak in it usual tone, of a remark asid 
a “by the bye.”

“is ani on els come to dine besid mr. casaubon?”

“not that i know of.”

“i hope there is some on els. then i shall not hear him eat hi 
so.”

“what is there remark about hi soup-eat?”

“realli, dodo, can’t you hear how he scrape hi spoon? and he 
blink befor he speak. i don’t know whether lock blink, but i’
sure i am sorri for those who sat opposit to him if he did.”

“celia,” said dorothea, with emphat graviti, “prai don’t make 
more observ of that kind.”

“why not? thei ar quit true,” return celia, who had her reason 
persev, though she wa begin to be a littl afraid.

“mani thing ar true which onli the commonest mind observ.”

“then i think the commonest mind must be rather us. i think it 
a piti mr. casaubon’s mother had not a common mind: she might 
taught him better.” celia wa inwardli frighten, and readi to 
awai, now she had hurl thi light javelin.

dorothea’s feel had gather to an avalanch, and there could be 
further prepar.

“it is right to tell you, celia, that i am engag to marri mr.
casaubon.”

perhap celia had never turn so pale befor. the paper man she 
make would have had hi leg injur, but for her habitu care 
whatev she held in her hand. she laid the fragil figur down 
onc, and sat perfectli still for a few moment. when she spoke 
wa a tear gather.

“oh, dodo, i hope you will be happi.” her sisterli tender could 
but surmount other feel at thi moment, and her fear were 
fear of affect.

dorothea wa still hurt and agit.

“it is quit decid, then?” said celia, in an aw under tone. “
uncl know?”

“i have accept mr. casaubon’s offer. my uncl brought me the 
that contain it; he knew about it beforehand.”

“i beg your pardon, if i have said anyth to hurt you, dodo,” 
celia, with a slight sob. she never could have thought that she 
feel as she did. there wa someth funer in the whole affair, 
mr. casaubon seem to be the offici clergyman, about whom 
would be indec to make remark.

“never mind, kitti, do not griev. we should never admir the 
peopl. i often offend in someth of the same wai; i am apt to 
too strongli of those who don’t pleas me.”

in spite of thi magnanim dorothea wa still smart: perhap 
much from celia’s subdu astonish as from her small critic. 
cours all the world round tipton would be out of sympathi with 
marriag. dorothea knew of no on who thought as she did about life 
it best object.

nevertheless befor the even wa at an end she wa veri happi. in 
hour’s _tête-à-tête_ with mr. casaubon she talk to him with 
freedom than she had ever felt befor, even pour out her joi at 
thought of devot herself to him, and of learn how she might 
share and further all hi great end. mr. casaubon wa touch with 
unknown delight (what man would not have been?) at thi 
unrestrain ardor: he wa not surpris (what lover would have been?)
that he should be the object of it.

“my dear young ladi—miss brook—dorothea!” he said, press her 
between hi hand, “thi is a happi greater than i had 
imagin to be in reserv for me. that i should ever meet with a 
and person so rich in the mingl grace which could render 
desir, wa far inde from my concept. you have all—nai, 
than all—those qualiti which i have ever regard as 
characterist excel of womanhood. the great charm of your sex 
it capabl of an ardent self-sacrif affect, and herein 
see it fit to round and complet the exist of our own.
hitherto i have known few pleasur save of the sever kind: 
satisfact have been those of the solitari student. i have 
littl dispos to gather flower that would wither in my hand, but 
i shall pluck them with eager, to place them in your bosom.”

no speech could have been more thoroughli honest in it intent: 
frigid rhetor at the end wa as sincer as the bark of a dog, or 
caw of an amor rook. would it not be rash to conclud that 
wa no passion behind those sonnet to delia which strike us as 
thin music of a mandolin?

dorothea’s faith suppli all that mr. casaubon’s word seem to 
unsaid: what believ see a disturb omiss or infel? 
text, whether of prophet or of poet, expand for whatev we can 
into it, and even hi bad grammar is sublim.

“i am veri ignor—you will quit wonder at my ignor,” 
dorothea. “i have so mani thought that mai be quit mistaken; and 
i shall be abl to tell them all to you, and ask you about them. but,”
she ad, with rapid imagin of mr. casaubon’s probabl feel,
“i will not troubl you too much; onli when you ar inclin to 
to me. you must often be weari with the pursuit of subject in your 
track. i shall gain enough if you will take me with you there.”

“how should i be abl now to persever in ani path without 
companionship?” said mr. casaubon, kiss her candid brow, and 
that heaven had vouchsaf him a bless in everi wai suit to 
peculiar want. he wa be unconsci wrought upon by the 
of a natur which wa entir without hidden calcul either 
immedi effect or for remot end. it wa thi which made 
so childlik, and, accord to some judg, so stupid, with all 
reput clever; as, for exampl, in the present case of 
herself, metaphor speak, at mr. casaubon’s feet, and 
hi unfashion shoe-ti as if he were a protest pope. she 
not in the least teach mr. casaubon to ask if he were good 
for her, but mere ask herself anxious how she could be 
enough for mr. casaubon. befor he left the next dai it had 
decid that the marriag should take place within six week. why not?
mr. casaubon’s hous wa readi. it wa not a parsonag, but 
consider mansion, with much land attach to it. the parsonag 
inhabit by the curat, who did all the duti except preach 
morn sermon.




chapter vi.

my ladi’s tongu is like the meadow blade,
that cut you stroke them with idl hand.
nice cut is her function: she 
with spiritu edg the millet-seed,
and make intang save.


as mr. casaubon’s carriag wa pass out of the gatewai, it 
the entranc of a poni phaeton driven by a ladi with a servant 
behind. it wa doubt whether the recognit had been mutual, 
mr. casaubon wa look absent befor him; but the ladi 
quick-ei, and threw a nod and a “how do you do?” in the nick of time.
in spite of her shabbi bonnet and veri old indian shawl, it wa 
that the lodg-keeper regard her as an import personag, from 
low curtsi which wa drop on the entranc of the small phaeton.

“well, mr. fitchett, how ar your fowl lai now?” said 
high-color, dark-ei ladi, with the clearest chisel utter.

“pretti well for lai, madam, but thei’ve ta’en to eat their egg:
i’ve no peac o’ mind with ’em at all.”

“oh, the cannib! better sell them cheap at onc. what will you 
them a coupl? on can’t eat fowl of a bad charact at a high price.”

“well, madam, half-a-crown: i couldn’t let ’em go, not under.”

“half-a-crown, these time! come now—for the rector’s chicken-broth 
a sundai. he ha consum all our that i can spare. you ar half 
with the sermon, mr. fitchett, rememb that. take a pair 
tumbler-pigeon for them—littl beauti. you must come and see them.
you have no tumbler among your pigeon.”

“well, madam, master fitchett shall go and see ’em after work. he’
veri hot on new sort; to oblig you.”

“oblig me! it will be the best bargain he ever made. a pair of 
pigeon for a coupl of wick spanish fowl that eat their own egg!
don’t you and fitchett boast too much, that is all!”

the phaeton wa driven onward with the last word, leav mr.
fitchett laugh and shake her head slowli, with an 
“sure_ly_, sure_ly_!”—from which it might be infer that she 
have found the countri-side somewhat duller if the rector’s ladi 
been less free-spoken and less of a skinflint. inde, both the 
and labor in the parish of freshitt and tipton would have felt 
sad lack of convers but for the stori about what mr.
cadwallad said and did: a ladi of immeasur high birth, descend,
as it were, from unknown earl, dim as the crowd of heroic shade—
plead poverti, pare down price, and cut joke in the 
companion manner, though with a turn of tongu that let you 
who she wa. such a ladi gave a neighborli to both rank 
religion, and mitig the bitter of uncommut tith. a much 
exemplari charact with an infus of sour digniti would not 
further their comprehens of the thirti-nine articl, and 
have been less social unit.

mr. brook, see mr. cadwallad’s merit from a differ point 
view, winc a littl when her name wa announc in the librari, 
he wa sit alon.

“i see you have had our lowick cicero here,” she said, seat 
comfort, throw back her wrap, and show a thin but well-
figur. “i suspect you and he ar brew some bad politi, els 
would not be see so much of the live man. i shall inform 
you: rememb you ar both suspici charact sinc you took peel’
side about the cathol bill. i shall tell everybodi that you ar 
to put up for middlemarch on the whig side when old pinkerton resign,
and that casaubon is go to help you in an underhand manner: go 
bribe the voter with pamphlet, and throw open the public-hous 
distribut them. come, confess!”

“noth of the sort,” said mr. brook, smile and rub 
ey-glass, but realli blush a littl at the impeach. “
and i don’t talk polit much. he doesn’t care much about 
philanthrop side of thing; punish, and that kind of thing. 
onli care about church question. that is not my line of action, 
know.”

“ra-a-ther too much, my friend. i have heard of your do. who wa 
that sold hi bit of land to the papist at middlemarch? i believ 
bought it on purpos. you ar a perfect gui faux. see if you ar 
burnt in effigi thi 5th of novemb come. humphrei would not come 
quarrel with you about it, so i am come.”

“veri good. i wa prepar to be persecut for not persecut—
persecut, you know.”

“there you go! that is a piec of clap-trap you have got readi for 
hust. now, _do not_ let them lure you to the hust, my dear mr.
brook. a man alwai make a fool of himself, speechifi: there’s 
excus but be on the right side, so that you can ask a bless 
your hum and haw. you will lose yourself, i forewarn you. 
will make a saturdai pie of all parti’ opinion, and be pelt 
everybodi.”

“that is what i expect, you know,” said mr. brook, not wish 
betrai how littl he enjoi thi prophet sketch—“what i expect as 
independ man. as to the whig, a man who goe with the thinker 
not like to be hook on by ani parti. he mai go with them up to 
certain point—up to a certain point, you know. but that is what 
ladi never understand.”

“where your certain point is? no. i should like to be told how a 
can have ani certain point when he belong to no parti—lead a 
life, and never let hi friend know hi address. ‘nobodi 
where brook will be—there’s no count on brook’—that is what 
sai of you, to be quit frank. now, do turn respect. how will 
like go to session with everybodi look shy on you, and you 
a bad conscienc and an empti pocket?”

“i don’t pretend to argu with a ladi on polit,” said mr. brook,
with an air of smile indiffer, but feel rather 
consciou that thi attack of mr. cadwallad’s had open 
defens campaign to which certain rash step had expos him. “
sex ar not thinker, you know—_varium et mutabil semper_—that kind 
thing. you don’t know virgil. i knew”—mr. brook reflect in time 
he had not had the person acquaint of the augustan poet—“i 
go to sai, poor stoddart, you know. that wa what _he_ said. 
ladi ar alwai against an independ attitud—a man’s care 
noth but truth, and that sort of thing. and there is no part of 
counti where opinion is narrow than it is here—i don’t mean to 
stone, you know, but somebodi is want to take the independ line;
and if i don’t take it, who will?”

“who? why, ani upstart who ha got neither blood nor posit. 
of stand should consum their independ nonsens at home, not 
it about. and you! who ar go to marri your niec, as good as 
daughter, to on of our best men. sir jame would be cruelli annoi:
it will be too hard on him if you turn round now and make yourself 
whig sign-board.”

mr. brook again winc inwardli, for dorothea’s engag had 
sooner been decid, than he had thought of mr. cadwallad’
prospect taunt. it might have been easi for ignor observ 
sai, “quarrel with mr. cadwallad;” but where is a countri 
to go who quarrel with hi oldest neighbor? who could tast the 
flavor in the name of brook if it were deliv casual, like 
without a seal? certainli a man can onli be cosmopolitan up to 
certain point.

“i hope chettam and i shall alwai be good friend; but i am sorri 
sai there is no prospect of hi marri my niec,” said mr. brook,
much reliev to see through the window that celia wa come in.

“why not?” said mr. cadwallad, with a sharp note of surpris. “it 
hardli a fortnight sinc you and i were talk about it.”

“my niec ha chosen anoth suitor—ha chosen him, you know. i 
had noth to do with it. i should have prefer chettam; and 
should have said chettam wa the man ani girl would have chosen. 
there is no account for these thing. your sex is caprici, 
know.”

“why, whom do you mean to sai that you ar go to let her marri?”
mr. cadwallad’s mind wa rapidli survei the possibl 
choic for dorothea.

but here celia enter, bloom from a walk in the garden, and 
greet with her deliv mr. brook from the necess of 
immedi. he got up hastili, and sai, “by the wai, i must 
to wright about the hors,” shuffl quickli out of the room.

“my dear child, what is thi?—thi about your sister’s engag?”
said mr. cadwallad.

“she is engag to marri mr. casaubon,” said celia, resort, 
usual, to the simplest statement of fact, and enjoi thi 
of speak to the rector’s wife alon.

“thi is fright. how long ha it been go on?”

“i onli knew of it yesterdai. thei ar to be marri in six week.”

“well, my dear, i wish you joi of your brother-in-law.”

“i am so sorri for dorothea.”

“sorri! it is her do, i suppos.”

“ye; she sai mr. casaubon ha a great soul.”

“with all my heart.”

“oh, mr. cadwallad, i don’t think it can be nice to marri a man 
a great soul.”

“well, my dear, take warn. you know the look of on now; when 
next come and want to marri you, don’t you accept him.”

“i’m sure i never should.”

“no; on such in a famili is enough. so your sister never care 
sir jame chettam? what would you have said to _him_ for 
brother-in-law?”

“i should have like that veri much. i am sure he would have been 
good husband. onli,” celia ad, with a slight blush (she 
seem to blush as she breath), “i don’t think he would have 
dorothea.”

“not high-flown enough?”

“dodo is veri strict. she think so much about everyth, and is 
particular about what on sai. sir jame never seem to pleas her.”

“she must have encourag him, i am sure. that is not veri credit.”

“pleas don’t be angri with dodo; she doe not see thing. she 
so much about the cottag, and she wa rude to sir jame sometim;
but he is so kind, he never notic it.”

“well,” said mr. cadwallad, put on her shawl, and rise, as 
in hast, “i must go straight to sir jame and break thi to him. 
will have brought hi mother back by thi time, and i must call. 
uncl will never tell him. we ar all disappoint, my dear. 
peopl should think of their famili in marri. i set a 
exampl—marri a poor clergyman, and made myself a pitiabl 
among the de braci—oblig to get my coal by stratagem, and prai 
heaven for my salad oil. howev, casaubon ha monei enough; i must 
him that justic. as to hi blood, i suppos the famili quarter 
three cuttl-fish sabl, and a comment rampant. by the bye, 
i go, my dear, i must speak to your mr. carter about pastri. i want 
send my young cook to learn of her. poor peopl with four children,
like us, you know, can’t afford to keep a good cook. i have no 
mr. carter will oblig me. sir jame’s cook is a perfect dragon.”

in less than an hour, mr. cadwallad had circumv mr. carter 
driven to freshitt hall, which wa not far from her own parsonag, 
husband be resid in freshitt and keep a curat in tipton.

sir jame chettam had return from the short journei which had 
him absent for a coupl of dai, and had chang hi dress, 
to ride over to tipton grang. hi hors wa stand at the door 
mr. cadwallad drove up, and he immedi appear there himself,
whip in hand. ladi chettam had not yet return, but mr. cadwallad’
errand could not be despatch in the presenc of groom, so she 
to be taken into the conservatori close by, to look at the new plant;
and on come to a contempl stand, she said—

“i have a great shock for you; i hope you ar not so far gone in 
as you pretend to be.”

it wa of no us protest against mr. cadwallad’s wai of 
thing. but sir jame’s counten chang a littl. he felt a 
alarm.

“i do believ brook is go to expos himself after all. i 
him of mean to stand for middlemarch on the liber side, and 
look silli and never deni it—talk about the independ line, 
the usual nonsens.”

“is that all?” said sir jame, much reliev.

“why,” rejoin mr. cadwallad, with a sharper note, “you don’t 
to sai that you would like him to turn public man in that wai—make 
sort of polit cheap jack of himself?”

“he might be dissuad, i should think. he would not like the expens.”

“that is what i told him. he is vulner to reason there—alwai a 
grain of common-sens in an ounc of miserli. miserli is 
capit qualiti to run in famili; it’s the safe side for mad 
dip on. and there must be a littl crack in the brook famili, els 
should not see what we ar to see.”

“what? brook stand for middlemarch?”

“wors than that. i realli feel a littl respons. i alwai told 
miss brook would be such a fine match. i knew there wa a great 
of nonsens in her—a flighti sort of methodist stuff. but 
thing wear out of girl. howev, i am taken by surpris for onc.”

“what do you mean, mr. cadwallad?” said sir jame. hi fear 
miss brook should have run awai to join the moravian brethren, or 
preposter sect unknown to good societi, wa a littl allai by 
knowledg that mr. cadwallad alwai made the worst of thing. “
ha happen to miss brook? prai speak out.”

“veri well. she is engag to be marri.” mr. cadwallad paus 
few moment, observ the deepli hurt express in her friend’s face,
which he wa try to conceal by a nervou smile, while he whip 
boot; but she soon ad, “engag to casaubon.”

sir jame let hi whip fall and stoop to pick it up. perhap hi 
had never befor gather so much concentr disgust as when 
turn to mr. cadwallad and repeat, “casaubon?”

“even so. you know my errand now.”

“good god! it is horribl! he is no better than a mummi!” (the point 
view ha to be allow for, as that of a bloom and 
rival.)

“she sai, he is a great soul.—a great bladder for dri pea to 
in!” said mr. cadwallad.

“what busi ha an old bachelor like that to marri?” said sir jame.
“he ha on foot in the grave.”

“he mean to draw it out again, i suppos.”

“brook ought not to allow it: he should insist on it be put 
till she is of ag. she would think better of it then. what is 
guardian for?”

“as if you could ever squeez a resolut out of brook!”

“cadwallad might talk to him.”

“not he! humphrei find everybodi charm. i never can get him 
abus casaubon. he will even speak well of the bishop, though i 
him it is unnatur in a benef clergyman; what can on do with 
husband who attend so littl to the decenc? i hide it as well as 
can by abus everybodi myself. come, come, cheer up! you ar well 
of miss brook, a girl who would have been requir you to see 
star by daylight. between ourselv, littl celia is worth two of her,
and like after all to be the better match. for thi marriag 
casaubon is as good as go to a nunneri.”

“oh, on my own account—it is for miss brook’s sake i think her 
should try to us their influenc.”

“well, humphrei doesn’t know yet. but when i tell him, you mai 
on it he will sai, ‘why not? casaubon is a good fellow—and young—
enough.’ these charit peopl never know vinegar from wine till 
have swallow it and got the colic. howev, if i were a man i 
prefer celia, especi when dorothea wa gone. the truth is, you 
been court on and have won the other. i can see that she 
you almost as much as a man expect to be admir. if it were ani 
but me who said so, you might think it exagger. good-by!”

sir jame hand mr. cadwallad to the phaeton, and then jump 
hi hors. he wa not go to renounc hi ride becaus of 
friend’s unpleas new—onli to ride the faster in some 
direct than that of tipton grang.

now, why on earth should mr. cadwallad have been at all busi 
miss brook’s marriag; and why, when on match that she like to 
she had a hand in wa frustrat, should she have straightwai 
the preliminari of anoth? wa there ani ingeni plot, 
hide-and-seek cours of action, which might be detect by a 
telescop watch? not at all: a telescop might have swept the 
of tipton and freshitt, the whole area visit by mr. cadwallad 
her phaeton, without wit ani interview that could 
suspicion, or ani scene from which she did not return with the 
unperturb keen of ey and the same high natur color. in fact,
if that conveni vehicl had exist in the dai of the seven sage,
on of them would doubtless have remark, that you can know littl 
women by follow them about in their poni-phaeton. even with 
microscop direct on a water-drop we find ourselv 
interpret which turn out to be rather coars; for wherea under 
weak len you mai seem to see a creatur exhibit an activ 
into which other smaller creatur activ plai as if thei were 
mani anim tax-penni, a stronger len reveal to you 
tiniest hairlet which make vortic for these victim while 
swallow wait passiv at hi receipt of custom. in thi wai,
metaphor speak, a strong len appli to mr. cadwallad’
match-make will show a plai of minut caus produc what mai 
call thought and speech vortic to bring her the sort of food 
need. her life wa rural simpl, quit free from secret 
foul, danger, or otherwis import, and not conscious 
by the great affair of the world. all the more did the affair of 
great world interest her, when commun in the letter of high-
relat: the wai in which fascin younger son had gone to 
dog by marri their mistress; the fine old-blood idioci of 
lord tapir, and the furiou gouti humor of old lord megatherium; 
exact cross of genealog which had brought a coronet into a 
branch and widen the relat of scandal,—these were topic of 
she retain detail with the utmost accuraci, and reproduc them 
an excel pickl of epigram, which she herself enjoi the 
becaus she believ as unquestion in birth and no-birth as she 
in game and vermin. she would never have disown ani on on the 
of poverti: a de braci reduc to take hi dinner in a basin would 
seem to her an exampl of patho worth exagger, and i fear 
aristocrat vice would not have horrifi her. but her 
toward the vulgar rich wa a sort of religi hatr: thei 
probabl made all their monei out of high retail price, and mr.
cadwallad detest high price for everyth that wa not paid 
kind at the rectori: such peopl were no part of god’s design in 
the world; and their accent wa an afflict to the ear. a town 
such monster abound wa hardli more than a sort of low comedi, 
could not be taken account of in a well-bred scheme of the univers.
let ani ladi who is inclin to be hard on mr. cadwallad 
into the comprehens of her own beauti view, and be 
sure that thei afford accommod for all the live which have 
honor to coexist with her.

with such a mind, activ as phosphoru, bite everyth that 
near into the form that suit it, how could mr. cadwallad feel 
the miss brook and their matrimoni prospect were alien to her?
especi as it had been the habit of year for her to scold mr.
brook with the friendliest frank, and let him know in 
that she thought him a poor creatur. from the first arriv of 
young ladi in tipton she had prearrang dorothea’s marriag with 
jame, and if it had taken place would have been quit sure that it 
her do: that it should not take place after she had preconceiv it,
caus her an irrit which everi thinker will sympath with. 
wa the diplomatist of tipton and freshitt, and for anyth to 
in spite of her wa an offens irregular. as to freak like 
of miss brook’s, mr. cadwallad had no patienc with them, and 
saw that her opinion of thi girl had been infect with some of 
husband’s weak charit: those methodist whim, that air 
be more religi than the rector and curat togeth, came from 
deeper and more constitut diseas than she had been will 
believ.

“howev,” said mr. cadwallad, first to herself and afterward 
her husband, “i throw her over: there wa a chanc, if she had 
sir jame, of her becom a sane, sensibl woman. he would never 
contradict her, and when a woman is not contradict, she ha 
motiv for obstinaci in her absurd. but now i wish her joi of 
hair shirt.”

it follow that mr. cadwallad must decid on anoth match for 
jame, and have made up her mind that it wa to be the younger 
brook, there could not have been a more skil move toward 
success of her plan than her hint to the baronet that he had made 
impress on celia’s heart. for he wa not on of those gentlemen 
languish after the unattain sappho’s appl that laugh from 
topmost bough—the charm 

“smile like the knot of cowslip on the cliff,
not to be come at by the will hand.”


he had no sonnet to write, and it could not strike him agreeabl 
he wa not an object of prefer to the woman whom he had prefer.
alreadi the knowledg that dorothea had chosen mr. casaubon had 
hi attach and relax it hold. although sir jame wa 
sportsman, he had some other feel toward women than toward 
and fox, and did not regard hi futur wife in the light of prei,
valuabl chiefli for the excit of the chase. neither wa he 
well acquaint with the habit of primit race as to feel that 
ideal combat for her, tomahawk in hand, so to speak, wa necessari 
the histor continu of the marriag-tie. on the contrari, 
the amiabl vaniti which knit us to those who ar fond of us, 
disinclin us to those who ar indiffer, and also a good 
natur, the mere idea that a woman had a kind toward him 
littl thread of tender from out hi heart toward her.

thu it happen, that after sir jame had ridden rather fast for 
an hour in a direct awai from tipton grang, he slacken hi pace,
and at last turn into a road which would lead him back by a 
cut. variou feel wrought in him the determin after all to 
to the grang to-dai as if noth new had happen. he could not 
rejoic that he had never made the offer and been reject; 
friendli polit requir that he should call to see dorothea 
the cottag, and now happili mr. cadwallad had prepar him 
offer hi congratul, if necessari, without show too 
awkward. he realli did not like it: give up dorothea wa 
pain to him; but there wa someth in the resolv to make 
visit forthwith and conquer all show of feel, which wa a sort 
file-bite and counter-irrit. and without hi 
recogn the impuls, there certainli wa present in him the 
that celia would be there, and that he should pai her more 
than he had done befor.

we mortal, men and women, devour mani a disappoint 
breakfast and dinner-time; keep back the tear and look a littl 
about the lip, and in answer to inquiri sai, “oh, noth!” 
help us; and pride is not a bad thing when it onli urg us to 
our own hurt—not to hurt other.




chapter vii.

“piacer e 
vuol la sua stagion.”
—_italian proverb_.


mr. casaubon, as might be expect, spent a great deal of hi time 
the grang in these week, and the hindranc which courtship 
to the progress of hi great work—the kei to all mytholog—
made him look forward the more eagerli to the happi termin 
courtship. but he had deliber incur the hindranc, have 
up hi mind that it wa now time for him to adorn hi life with 
grace of femal companionship, to irradi the gloom which 
wa apt to hang over the interv of studiou labor with the plai 
femal fanci, and to secur in thi, hi culmin ag, the solac 
femal tendanc for hi declin year. henc he determin to 
himself to the stream of feel, and perhap wa surpris to 
what an exceedingli shallow rill it wa. as in droughti region 
by immers could onli be perform symbol, mr. casaubon 
that sprinkl wa the utmost approach to a plung which hi 
would afford him; and he conclud that the poet had much 
the forc of masculin passion. nevertheless, he observ with 
that miss brook show an ardent submiss affect which 
to fulfil hi most agreeabl previs of marriag. it had onc 
twice cross hi mind that possibl there wa some defici 
dorothea to account for the moder of hi abandon; but he 
unabl to discern the defici, or to figur to himself a woman 
would have pleas him better; so that there wa clearli no reason 
fall back upon but the exagger of human tradit.

“could i not be prepar myself now to be more us?” said 
to him, on morn, earli in the time of courtship; “could i not 
to read latin and greek aloud to you, as milton’s daughter did 
their father, without understand what thei read?”

“i fear that would be wearisom to you,” said mr. casaubon, smile;
“and, inde, if i rememb rightli, the young women you have 
regard that exercis in unknown tongu as a ground for 
against the poet.”

“ye; but in the first place thei were veri naughti girl, els 
would have been proud to minist to such a father; and in the 
place thei might have studi privat and taught themselv 
understand what thei read, and then it would have been interest. 
hope you don’t expect me to be naughti and stupid?”

“i expect you to be all that an exquisit young ladi can be in 
possibl relat of life. certainli it might be a great advantag 
you were abl to copi the greek charact, and to that end it were 
to begin with a littl read.”

dorothea seiz thi as a preciou permiss. she would not have 
mr. casaubon at onc to teach her the languag, dread of all 
to be tiresom instead of help; but it wa not entir out 
devot to her futur husband that she wish to know latin and greek.
those provinc of masculin knowledg seem to her a stand-
from which all truth could be seen more truli. as it wa, 
constantli doubt her own conclus, becaus she felt her 
ignor: how could she be confid that on-room cottag were 
for the glori of god, when men who knew the classic appear 
concili indiffer to the cottag with zeal for the glori?
perhap even hebrew might be necessari—at least the alphabet and a 
root—in order to arriv at the core of thing, and judg soundli 
the social duti of the christian. and she had not reach that 
of renunci at which she would have been satisfi with have 
wise husband: she wish, poor child, to be wise herself. miss 
wa certainli veri naiv with all her alleg clever. celia, 
mind had never been thought too power, saw the empti of 
peopl’s pretens much more readili. to have in gener but 
feel, seem to be the onli secur against feel too much on 
particular occas.

howev, mr. casaubon consent to listen and teach for an 
togeth, like a schoolmast of littl boi, or rather like a lover,
to whom a mistress’s elementari ignor and difficulti have 
touch fit. few scholar would have dislik teach 
alphabet under such circumst. but dorothea herself wa a 
shock and discourag at her own stupid, and the answer she 
to some timid question about the valu of the greek accent gave her 
pain suspicion that here inde there might be secret not 
of explan to a woman’s reason.

mr. brook had no doubt on that point, and express himself with 
usual strength upon it on dai that he came into the librari while 
read wa go forward.

“well, but now, casaubon, such deep studi, classic, mathemat,
that kind of thing, ar too tax for a woman—too tax, you know.”

“dorothea is learn to read the charact simpli,” said mr.
casaubon, evad the question. “she had the veri consider 
of save my ey.”

“ah, well, without understand, you know—that mai not be so bad. 
there is a light about the feminin mind—a touch and go—music, 
fine art, that kind of thing—thei should studi those up to a 
point, women should; but in a light wai, you know. a woman should 
abl to sit down and plai you or sing you a good old english tune. 
is what i like; though i have heard most thing—been at the opera 
vienna: gluck, mozart, everyth of that sort. but i’m a 
in music—it’s not like idea, you know. i stick to the good old tune.”

“mr. casaubon is not fond of the piano, and i am veri glad he is not,”
said dorothea, whose slight regard for domest music and feminin 
art must be forgiven her, consid the small tinkl and 
in which thei chiefli consist at that dark period. she smile 
look up at her betroth with grate ey. if he had alwai 
ask her to plai the “last rose of summer,” she would have 
much resign. “he sai there is onli an old harpsichord at lowick,
and it is cover with book.”

“ah, there you ar behind celia, my dear. celia, now, plai 
prettili, and is alwai readi to plai. howev, sinc casaubon doe 
like it, you ar all right. but it’s a piti you should not have 
recreat of that sort, casaubon: the bow alwai strung—that kind 
thing, you know—will not do.”

“i never could look on it in the light of a recreat to have my 
teas with measur nois,” said mr. casaubon. “a tune much 
ha the ridicul effect of make the word in my mind perform a 
of minuet to keep time—an effect hardli toler, i imagin, 
boyhood. as to the grander form of music, worthi to accompani 
celebr, and even to serv as an educ influenc accord 
the ancient concept, i sai noth, for with these we ar 
immedi concern.”

“no; but music of that sort i should enjoi,” said dorothea. “when 
were come home from lausann my uncl took us to hear the great 
at freiberg, and it made me sob.”

“that kind of thing is not healthi, my dear,” said mr. brook.
“casaubon, she will be in your hand now: you must teach my niec 
take thing more quietli, eh, dorothea?”

he end with a smile, not wish to hurt hi niec, but 
think that it wa perhap better for her to be earli marri to 
sober a fellow as casaubon, sinc she would not hear of chettam.

“it is wonder, though,” he said to himself as he shuffl out of 
room—“it is wonder that she should have like him. howev, 
match is good. i should have been travel out of my brief to 
hinder it, let mr. cadwallad sai what she will. he is 
certain to be a bishop, is casaubon. that wa a veri 
pamphlet of hi on the cathol question:—a deaneri at least. thei 
him a deaneri.”

and here i must vindic a claim to philosoph reflect, 
remark that mr. brook on thi occas littl thought of 
radic speech which, at a later period, he wa led to make on 
incom of the bishop. what eleg historian would neglect a 
opportun for point out that hi hero did not forese 
histori of the world, or even their own action?—for exampl, 
henri of navarr, when a protest babi, littl thought of be 
cathol monarch; or that alfr the great, when he measur 
labori night with burn candl, had no idea of futur 
measur their idl dai with watch. here is a mine of truth, which,
howev vigor it mai be work, is like to outlast our coal.

but of mr. brook i make a further remark perhap less warrant 
preced—name, that if he had foreknown hi speech, it might 
have made ani great differ. to think with pleasur of hi niec’
husband have a larg ecclesiast incom wa on thing—to make 
liber speech wa anoth thing; and it is a narrow mind which 
look at a subject from variou point of view.




chapter viii.

“oh, rescu her! i am her brother now,
and you her father. everi gentl 
should have a guardian in each gentleman.”


it wa wonder to sir jame chettam how well he continu to 
go to the grang after he had onc encount the difficulti 
see dorothea for the first time in the light of a woman who 
engag to anoth man. of cours the fork lightn seem to 
through him when he first approach her, and he remain 
throughout the interview of hide uneasi; but, good as he wa, 
must be own that hi uneasi wa less than it would have been 
he had thought hi rival a brilliant and desir match. he had 
sens of be eclips by mr. casaubon; he wa onli shock 
dorothea wa under a melancholi illus, and hi mortif 
some of it bitter by be mingl with compass.

nevertheless, while sir jame said to himself that he had 
resign her, sinc with the pervers of a desdemona she had 
affect a propos match that wa clearli suitabl and accord 
natur; he could not yet be quit passiv under the idea of 
engag to mr. casaubon. on the dai when he first saw them 
in the light of hi present knowledg, it seem to him that he had 
taken the affair serious enough. brook wa realli culpabl; he 
to have hinder it. who could speak to him? someth might be 
perhap even now, at least to defer the marriag. on hi wai home 
turn into the rectori and ask for mr. cadwallad. happili, 
rector wa at home, and hi visitor wa shown into the studi, where 
the fish tackl hung. but he himself wa in a littl room adjoin,
at work with hi turn apparatu, and he call to the baronet 
join him there. the two were better friend than ani other 
and clergyman in the counti—a signific fact which wa in 
with the amiabl express of their face.

mr. cadwallad wa a larg man, with full lip and a sweet smile; 
plain and rough in hi exterior, but with that solid imperturb 
and good-humor which is infecti, and like great grassi hill in 
sunshin, quiet even an irrit egoism, and make it rather 
of itself. “well, how ar you?” he said, show a hand not quit 
to be grasp. “sorri i miss you befor. is there 
particular? you look vex.”

sir jame’s brow had a littl creas in it, a littl depress of 
eyebrow, which he seem purpos to exagger as he answer.

“it is onli thi conduct of brook’s. i realli think somebodi 
speak to him.”

“what? mean to stand?” said mr. cadwallad, go on with 
arrang of the reel which he had just been turn. “i 
think he mean it. but where’s the harm, if he like it? ani on 
object to whiggeri should be glad when the whig don’t put up 
strongest fellow. thei won’t overturn the constitut with our 
brook’s head for a batter ram.”

“oh, i don’t mean that,” said sir jame, who, after put down 
hat and throw himself into a chair, had begun to nurs hi leg 
examin the sole of hi boot with much bitter. “i mean 
marriag. i mean hi let that bloom young girl marri casaubon.”

“what is the matter with casaubon? i see no harm in him—if the 
like him.”

“she is too young to know what she like. her guardian ought 
interfer. he ought not to allow the thing to be done in thi 
manner. i wonder a man like you, cadwallad—a man with daughter, 
look at the affair with indiffer: and with such a heart as your!
do think serious about it.”

“i am not joke; i am as seriou as possibl,” said the rector, with 
provok littl inward laugh. “you ar as bad as elinor. she ha 
want me to go and lectur brook; and i have remind her that 
friend had a veri poor opinion of the match she made when she 
me.”

“but look at casaubon,” said sir jame, indignantli. “he must be fifti,
and i don’t believ he could ever have been much more than the 
of a man. look at hi leg!”

“confound you handsom young fellow! you think of have it all 
own wai in the world. you don’t understand women. thei don’t admir 
half so much as you admir yourselv. elinor us to tell her 
that she marri me for my ugli—it wa so variou and amus 
it had quit conquer her prudenc.”

“you! it wa easi enough for a woman to love you. but thi is 
question of beauti. i don’t _like_ casaubon.” thi wa sir jame’
strongest wai of impli that he thought ill of a man’s charact.

“why? what do you know against him?” said the rector lai down 
reel, and put hi thumb into hi armhol with an air 
attent.

sir jame paus. he did not usual find it easi to give hi reason:
it seem to him strang that peopl should not know them without 
told, sinc he onli felt what wa reason. at last he said—

“now, cadwallad, ha he got ani heart?”

“well, ye. i don’t mean of the melt sort, but a sound kernel,
_that_ you mai be sure of. he is veri good to hi poor relat:
pension sever of the women, and is educ a young fellow at 
good deal of expens. casaubon act up to hi sens of justic. 
mother’s sister made a bad match—a pole, i think—lost herself—at 
rate wa disown by her famili. if it had not been for that, 
would not have had so much monei by half. i believ he went himself 
find out hi cousin, and see what he could do for them. everi 
would not ring so well as that, if you tri hi metal. _you_ would,
chettam; but not everi man.”

“i don’t know,” said sir jame, color. “i am not so sure of myself.”
he paus a moment, and then ad, “that wa a right thing 
casaubon to do. but a man mai wish to do what is right, and yet be 
sort of parchment code. a woman mai not be happi with him. and i 
when a girl is so young as miss brook is, her friend ought 
interfer a littl to hinder her from do anyth foolish. 
laugh, becaus you fanci i have some feel on my own account. 
upon my honor, it is not that. i should feel just the same if i 
miss brook’s brother or uncl.”

“well, but what should you do?”

“i should sai that the marriag must not be decid on until she wa 
ag. and depend upon it, in that case, it would never come off. i 
you saw it as i do—i wish you would talk to brook about it.”

sir jame rose as he wa finish hi sentenc, for he saw mr.
cadwallad enter from the studi. she held by the hand her 
girl, about five year old, who immedi ran to papa, and wa 
comfort on hi knee.

“i hear what you ar talk about,” said the wife. “but you will 
no impress on humphrei. as long as the fish rise to hi bait,
everybodi is what he ought to be. bless you, casaubon ha got 
trout-stream, and doe not care about fish in it himself: 
there be a better fellow?”

“well, there is someth in that,” said the rector, with hi quiet,
inward laugh. “it is a veri good qualiti in a man to have 
trout-stream.”

“but serious,” said sir jame, whose vexat had not yet 
itself, “don’t you think the rector might do some good by speak?”

“oh, i told you beforehand what he would sai,” answer mr.
cadwallad, lift up her eyebrow. “i have done what i could: i 
my hand of the marriag.”

“in the first place,” said the rector, look rather grave, “it 
be nonsens to expect that i could convinc brook, and make him 
accordingli. brook is a veri good fellow, but pulpi; he will run 
ani mould, but he won’t keep shape.”

“he might keep shape long enough to defer the marriag,” said 
jame.

“but, my dear chettam, why should i us my influenc to casaubon’
disadvantag, unless i were much surer than i am that i should 
act for the advantag of miss brook? i know no harm of casaubon. 
don’t care about hi xisuthru and fee-fo-fum and the rest; but then 
doesn’t care about my fish-tackl. as to the line he took on 
cathol question, that wa unexpect; but he ha alwai been civil 
me, and i don’t see why i should spoil hi sport. for anyth i 
tell, miss brook mai be happier with him than she would be with 
other man.”

“humphrei! i have no patienc with you. you know you would rather 
under the hedg than with casaubon alon. you have noth to sai 
each other.”

“what ha that to do with miss brook’s marri him? she doe not 
it for my amus.”

“he ha got no good red blood in hi bodi,” said sir jame.

“no. somebodi put a drop under a magnifi-glass and it wa 
semicolon and parenthes,” said mr. cadwallad.

“why doe he not bring out hi book, instead of marri,” said 
jame, with a disgust which he held warrant by the sound feel 
an english layman.

“oh, he dream footnot, and thei run awai with all hi brain. 
sai, when he wa a littl boi, he made an abstract of ‘hop o’ 
thumb,’ and he ha been make abstract ever sinc. ugh! and that 
the man humphrei goe on sai that a woman mai be happi with.”

“well, he is what miss brook like,” said the rector. “i don’t 
to understand everi young ladi’s tast.”

“but if she were your own daughter?” said sir jame.

“that would be a differ affair. she is _not_ my daughter, and 
don’t feel call upon to interfer. casaubon is as good as most of us.
he is a scholarli clergyman, and credit to the cloth. some 
fellow speechifi at middlemarch said casaubon wa the 
straw-chop incumb, and freke wa the brick-and-mortar incumb,
and i wa the angl incumb. and upon my word, i don’t see that 
is wors or better than the other.” the rector end with hi 
laugh. he alwai saw the joke of ani satir against himself. 
conscienc wa larg and easi, like the rest of him: it did onli 
it could do without ani troubl.

clearli, there would be no interfer with miss brook’s 
through mr. cadwallad; and sir jame felt with some sad that 
wa to have perfect liberti of misjudg. it wa a sign of hi 
disposit that he did not slacken at all in hi intent of 
out dorothea’s design of the cottag. doubtless thi persist 
the best cours for hi own digniti: but pride onli help us to 
gener; it never make us so, ani more than vaniti make us witti.
she wa now enough awar of sir jame’s posit with regard to her, 
appreci the rectitud of hi persever in a landlord’s duti, 
which he had at first been urg by a lover’s complais, and 
pleasur in it wa great enough to count for someth even in 
present happi. perhap she gave to sir jame chettam’s cottag 
the interest she could spare from mr. casaubon, or rather from 
symphoni of hope dream, admir trust, and passion 
devot which that learn gentleman had set plai in her soul.
henc it happen that in the good baronet’s succeed visit, 
he wa begin to pai small attent to celia, he found 
talk with more and more pleasur to dorothea. she wa 
unconstrain and without irrit toward him now, and he 
gradual discov the delight there is in frank kind 
companionship between a man and a woman who have no passion to hide 
confess.




chapter ix.

1_st gent_. an ancient land in ancient 
    is call “law-thirsti”: all the struggl 
    wa after order and a perfect rule.
    prai, where lie such land now? . . .

2_d gent_. why, where thei lai of old—in human soul.


mr. casaubon’s behavior about settlement wa highli satisfactori 
mr. brook, and the preliminari of marriag roll smoothli along,
shorten the week of courtship. the betroth bride must see 
futur home, and dictat ani chang that she would like to have 
there. a woman dictat befor marriag in order that she mai have 
appetit for submiss afterward. and certainli, the mistak that 
male and femal mortal make when we have our own wai might 
rais some wonder that we ar so fond of it.

on a grai but dry novemb morn dorothea drove to lowick in 
with her uncl and celia. mr. casaubon’s home wa the manor-hous.
close by, visibl from some part of the garden, wa the littl church,
with the old parsonag opposit. in the begin of hi career, mr.
casaubon had onli held the live, but the death of hi brother had 
him in possess of the manor also. it had a small park, with a 
old oak here and there, and an avenu of lime toward the 
front, with a sunk fenc between park and pleasur-ground, so that 
the draw-room window the glanc swept uninterruptedli along a 
of greensward till the lime end in a level of corn and pastur,
which often seem to melt into a lake under the set sun. thi 
the happi side of the hous, for the south and east look 
melancholi even under the brightest morn. the ground here were 
confin, the flower-bed show no veri care tendanc, and 
clump of tree, chiefli of sombr yew, had risen high, not ten 
from the window. the build, of greenish stone, wa in the 
english style, not ugli, but small-window and melancholi-look: 
sort of hous that must have children, mani flower, open window, 
littl vista of bright thing, to make it seem a joyou home. in 
latter end of autumn, with a spars remnant of yellow leav 
slowli athwart the dark evergreen in a still without sunshin, 
hous too had an air of autumn declin, and mr. casaubon, when 
present himself, had no bloom that could be thrown into relief 
that background.

“oh dear!” celia said to herself, “i am sure freshitt hall would 
been pleasant than thi.” she thought of the white freeston, 
pillar portico, and the terrac full of flower, sir jame 
abov them like a princ issu from hi enchant in a rose-bush,
with a handkerchief swiftli metamorphos from the most 
odor petal—sir jame, who talk so agreeabl, alwai about 
which had common-sens in them, and not about learn! celia had 
light young feminin tast which grave and weatherworn 
sometim prefer in a wife; but happili mr. casaubon’s bia had 
differ, for he would have had no chanc with celia.

dorothea, on the contrari, found the hous and ground all that 
could wish: the dark book-shelv in the long librari, the carpet 
curtain with color subdu by time, the curiou old map 
bird’s-ey view on the wall of the corridor, with here and there 
old vase below, had no oppress for her, and seem more 
than the cast and pictur at the grang, which her uncl had long 
brought home from hi travel—thei be probabl among the idea 
had taken in at on time. to poor dorothea these sever 
nuditi and smirk renaiss-correggios were 
inexplic, stare into the midst of her puritan concept: 
had never been taught how she could bring them into ani sort 
relev with her life. but the owner of lowick appar had 
been travel, and mr. casaubon’s studi of the past were 
carri on by mean of such aid.

dorothea walk about the hous with delight emot. 
seem hallow to her: thi wa to be the home of her wifehood, 
she look up with ey full of confid to mr. casaubon when he 
her attent special to some actual arrang and ask her if 
would like an alter. all appeal to her tast she met gratefulli,
but saw noth to alter. hi effort at exact courtesi and 
tender had no defect for her. she fill up all blank 
unmanifest perfect, interpret him as she interpret the 
of provid, and account for seem discord by her own 
to the higher harmoni. and there ar mani blank left in the week 
courtship which a love faith fill with happi assur.

“now, my dear dorothea, i wish you to favor me by point out 
room you would like to have as your boudoir,” said mr. casaubon,
show that hi view of the womanli natur were suffici larg 
includ that requir.

“it is veri kind of you to think of that,” said dorothea, “but i 
you i would rather have all those matter decid for me. i shall 
much happier to take everyth as it is—just as you have been us 
have it, or as you will yourself choos it to be. i have no motiv 
wish anyth els.”

“oh, dodo,” said celia, “will you not have the bow-window 
up-stair?”

mr. casaubon led the wai thither. the bow-window look down the 
of lime; the furnitur wa all of a fade blue, and there 
miniatur of ladi and gentlemen with powder hair hang in 
group. a piec of tapestri over a door also show a blue-green 
with a pale stag in it. the chair and tabl were thin-leg and 
to upset. it wa a room where on might fanci the ghost of 
tight-lace ladi revisit the scene of her embroideri. a 
bookcas contain duodecimo volum of polit literatur in calf,
complet the furnitur.

“ye,” said mr. brook, “thi would be a pretti room with some 
hang, sofa, and that sort of thing. a littl bare now.”

“no, uncl,” said dorothea, eagerli. “prai do not speak of 
anyth. there ar so mani other thing in the world that 
alter—i like to take these thing as thei ar. and you like them 
thei ar, don’t you?” she ad, look at mr. casaubon. “perhap 
wa your mother’s room when she wa young.”

“it wa,” he said, with hi slow bend of the head.

“thi is your mother,” said dorothea, who had turn to examin 
group of miniatur. “it is like the tini on you brought me; onli, 
should think, a better portrait. and thi on opposit, who is thi?”

“her elder sister. thei were, like you and your sister, the onli 
children of their parent, who hang abov them, you see.”

“the sister is pretti,” said celia, impli that she thought 
favor of mr. casaubon’s mother. it wa a new open to celia’
imagin, that he came of a famili who had all been young in 
time—the ladi wear necklac.

“it is a peculiar face,” said dorothea, look close. “those 
grai ey rather near togeth—and the delic irregular nose with 
sort of rippl in it—and all the powder curl hang backward.
altogeth it seem to me peculiar rather than pretti. there is 
even a famili like between her and your mother.”

“no. and thei were not alik in their lot.”

“you did not mention her to me,” said dorothea.

“my aunt made an unfortun marriag. i never saw her.”

dorothea wonder a littl, but felt that it would be indel 
then to ask for ani inform which mr. casaubon did not proffer, 
she turn to the window to admir the view. the sun had late 
the grai, and the avenu of lime cast shadow.

“shall we not walk in the garden now?” said dorothea.

“and you would like to see the church, you know,” said mr. brook. “
is a droll littl church. and the villag. it all li in a nut-shell.
by the wai, it will suit you, dorothea; for the cottag ar like a 
of alm-hous—littl garden, gilli-flower, that sort of thing.”

“ye, pleas,” said dorothea, look at mr. casaubon, “i should 
to see all that.” she had got noth from him more graphic about 
lowick cottag than that thei were “not bad.”

thei were soon on a gravel walk which led chiefli between 
border and clump of tree, thi be the nearest wai to the church,
mr. casaubon said. at the littl gate lead into the churchyard 
wa a paus while mr. casaubon went to the parsonag close by to 
a kei. celia, who had been hang a littl in the rear, came 
present, when she saw that mr. casaubon wa gone awai, and said 
her easi staccato, which alwai seem to contradict the suspicion 
ani malici intent—

“do you know, dorothea, i saw some on quit young come up on of 
walk.”

“is that astonish, celia?”

“there mai be a young garden, you know—why not?” said mr. brook. “
told casaubon he should chang hi garden.”

“no, not a garden,” said celia; “a gentleman with a sketch-book. 
had light-brown curl. i onli saw hi back. but he wa quit young.”

“the curat’s son, perhap,” said mr. brook. “ah, there is 
again, and tucker with him. he is go to introduc tucker. you don’
know tucker yet.”

mr. tucker wa the middl-ag curat, on of the “inferior clergi,”
who ar usual not want in son. but after the introduct, 
convers did not lead to ani question about hi famili, and 
startl apparit of youth wa forgotten by everi on 
celia. she inwardli declin to believ that the light-brown curl 
slim figur could have ani relationship to mr. tucker, who wa just 
old and musti-look as she would have expect mr. casaubon’s 
to be; doubtless an excel man who would go to heaven (for 
wish not to be unprincipl), but the corner of hi mouth were 
unpleas. celia thought with some dismal of the time she 
have to spend as bridesmaid at lowick, while the curat had probabl 
pretti littl children whom she could like, irrespect of principl.

mr. tucker wa invalu in their walk; and perhap mr. casaubon 
not been without foresight on thi head, the curat be abl 
answer all dorothea’s question about the villag and the 
parishion. everybodi, he assur her, wa well off in lowick: not 
cottag in those doubl cottag at a low rent but kept a pig, and 
strip of garden at the back were well tend. the small boi 
excel corduroi, the girl went out as tidi servant, or did 
littl straw-plait at home: no loom here, no dissent; and 
the public disposit wa rather toward lai by monei than 
spiritu, there wa not much vice. the speckl fowl were 
numer that mr. brook observ, “your farmer leav some barlei 
the women to glean, i see. the poor folk here might have a fowl 
their pot, as the good french king us to wish for all hi peopl. 
french eat a good mani fowl—skinni fowl, you know.”

“i think it wa a veri cheap wish of hi,” said dorothea, indignantli.
“ar king such monster that a wish like that must be reckon a 
virtu?”

“and if he wish them a skinni fowl,” said celia, “that would not 
nice. but perhap he wish them to have fat fowl.”

“ye, but the word ha drop out of the text, or perhap 
subauditum; that is, present in the king’s mind, but not utter,” 
mr. casaubon, smile and bend hi head toward celia, 
immedi drop backward a littl, becaus she could not bear mr.
casaubon to blink at her.

dorothea sank into silenc on the wai back to the hous. she felt 
disappoint, of which she wa yet asham, that there wa 
for her to do in lowick; and in the next few minut her mind 
glanc over the possibl, which she would have prefer, 
find that her home would be in a parish which had a larger share 
the world’s miseri, so that she might have had more activ duti 
it. then, recur to the futur actual befor her, she made 
pictur of more complet devot to mr. casaubon’s aim in which 
would await new duti. mani such might reveal themselv to the 
knowledg gain by her in that companionship.

mr. tucker soon left them, have some cleric work which would 
allow him to lunch at the hall; and as thei were re-enter the 
through the littl gate, mr. casaubon said—

“you seem a littl sad, dorothea. i trust you ar pleas with what 
have seen.”

“i am feel someth which is perhap foolish and wrong,” 
dorothea, with her usual open—“almost wish that the 
want more to be done for them here. i have known so few wai 
make my life good for anyth. of cours, my notion of 
must be narrow. i must learn new wai of help peopl.”

“doubtless,” said mr. casaubon. “each posit ha it 
duti. your, i trust, as the mistress of lowick, will not leav 
yearn unfulfil.”

“inde, i believ that,” said dorothea, earnestli. “do not 
that i am sad.”

“that is well. but, if you ar not tire, we will take anoth wai 
the hous than that by which we came.”

dorothea wa not at all tire, and a littl circuit wa made toward 
fine yew-tree, the chief hereditari glori of the ground on thi 
of the hous. as thei approach it, a figur, conspicu on a 
background of evergreen, wa seat on a bench, sketch the 
tree. mr. brook, who wa walk in front with celia, turn hi head,
and said—

“who is that youngster, casaubon?”

thei had come veri near when mr. casaubon answer—

“that is a young rel of mine, a second cousin: the grandson, 
fact,” he ad, look at dorothea, “of the ladi whose portrait 
have been notic, my aunt julia.”

the young man had laid down hi sketch-book and risen. hi 
light-brown curl, as well as hi youth, identifi him at 
with celia’s apparit.

“dorothea, let me introduc to you my cousin, mr. ladislaw. will, 
is miss brook.”

the cousin wa so close now, that, when he lift hi hat, 
could see a pair of grai ey rather near togeth, a 
irregular nose with a littl rippl in it, and hair fall backward;
but there wa a mouth and chin of a more promin, threaten 
than belong to the type of the grandmoth’s miniatur. 
ladislaw did not feel it necessari to smile, as if he were charm 
thi introduct to hi futur second cousin and her rel; 
wore rather a pout air of discont.

“you ar an artist, i see,” said mr. brook, take up the sketch-
and turn it over in hi unceremoni fashion.

“no, i onli sketch a littl. there is noth fit to be seen there,”
said young ladislaw, color, perhap with temper rather than modesti.

“oh, come, thi is a nice bit, now. i did a littl in thi wai 
at on time, you know. look here, now; thi is what i call a 
thing, done with what we us to call _brio_.” mr. brook held 
toward the two girl a larg color sketch of stoni ground and tree,
with a pool.

“i am no judg of these thing,” said dorothea, not coldli, but with 
eager deprec of the appeal to her. “you know, uncl, i never 
the beauti of those pictur which you sai ar so much prais. 
ar a languag i do not understand. i suppos there is some 
between pictur and natur which i am too ignor to feel—just as 
see what a greek sentenc stand for which mean noth to me.”
dorothea look up at mr. casaubon, who bow hi head toward her,
while mr. brook said, smile nonchalantli—

“bless me, now, how differ peopl ar! but you had a bad style 
teach, you know—els thi is just the thing for girl—sketch,
fine art and so on. but you took to draw plan; you don’t 
_morbidezza_, and that kind of thing. you will come to my hous, 
hope, and i will show you what i did in thi wai,” he continu,
turn to young ladislaw, who had to be recal from 
preoccup in observ dorothea. ladislaw had made up hi mind 
she must be an unpleas girl, sinc she wa go to marri casaubon,
and what she said of her stupid about pictur would have 
that opinion even if he had believ her. as it wa, he took her 
for a covert judgment, and wa certain that she thought hi 
detest. there wa too much clever in her apolog: she 
laugh both at her uncl and himself. but what a voic! it wa 
the voic of a soul that had onc live in an aeolian harp. thi 
be on of natur’s inconsist. there could be no sort of 
in a girl who would marri casaubon. but he turn from her, and 
hi thank for mr. brook’s invit.

“we will turn over my italian engrav togeth,” continu 
good-natur man. “i have no end of those thing, that i have laid 
for year. on get rusti in thi part of the countri, you know. 
you, casaubon; you stick to your studi; but my best idea 
undermost—out of us, you know. you clever young men must guard 
indol. i wa too indol, you know: els i might have 
anywher at on time.”

“that is a season admonit,” said mr. casaubon; “but now we 
pass on to the hous, lest the young ladi should be tire 
stand.”

when their back were turn, young ladislaw sat down to go on with 
sketch, and as he did so hi face broke into an express 
amus which increas as he went on draw, till at last he 
back hi head and laugh aloud. partli it wa the recept of hi 
artist product that tickl him; partli the notion of hi 
cousin as the lover of that girl; and partli mr. brook’s definit 
the place he might have held but for the impedi of indol. mr.
will ladislaw’s sens of the ludicr lit up hi featur 
agreeabl: it wa the pure enjoy of comic, and had no 
of sneer and self-exalt.

“what is your nephew go to do with himself, casaubon?” said mr.
brook, as thei went on.

“my cousin, you mean—not my nephew.”

“ye, ye, cousin. but in the wai of a career, you know.”

“the answer to that question is painfulli doubt. on leav rugbi 
declin to go to an english univers, where i would gladli 
place him, and chose what i must consid the anomal cours 
studi at heidelberg. and now he want to go abroad again, 
ani special object, save the vagu purpos of what he call cultur,
prepar for he know not what. he declin to choos a profess.”

“he ha no mean but what you furnish, i suppos.”

“i have alwai given him and hi friend reason to understand that 
would furnish in moder what wa necessari for provid him with 
scholarli educ, and launch him respect. i am 
bound to fulfil the expect so rais,” said mr. casaubon, 
hi conduct in the light of mere rectitud: a trait of delicaci 
dorothea notic with admir.

“he ha a thirst for travel; perhap he mai turn out a bruce or 
mungo park,” said mr. brook. “i had a notion of that myself at 
time.”

“no, he ha no bent toward explor, or the enlarg of 
geognosi: that would be a special purpos which i could recogn 
some approb, though without felicit him on a career which 
often end in prematur and violent death. but so far is he from 
ani desir for a more accur knowledg of the earth’s surfac, 
he said he should prefer not to know the sourc of the nile, and 
there should be some unknown region preserv as hunt ground 
the poetic imagin.”

“well, there is someth in that, you know,” said mr. brook, who 
certainli an imparti mind.

“it is, i fear, noth more than a part of hi gener inaccuraci 
indisposit to thorough of all kind, which would be a bad 
for him in ani profess, civil or sacr, even were he so 
submiss to ordinari rule as to choos on.”

“perhap he ha conscienti scrupl found on hi own unfit,”
said dorothea, who wa interest herself in find a 
explan. “becaus the law and medicin should be veri 
profess to undertak, should thei not? peopl’s live and 
depend on them.”

“doubtless; but i fear that my young rel will ladislaw is 
determin in hi avers to these call by a dislik to 
applic, and to that kind of acquir which is 
instrument, but is not charm or immedi invit 
self-indulg tast. i have insist to him on what aristotl 
state with admir breviti, that for the achiev of ani 
regard as an end there must be a prior exercis of mani energi 
acquir facil of a secondari order, demand patienc. i 
point to my own manuscript volum, which repres the toil of 
preparatori to a work not yet accomplish. but in vain. to 
reason of thi kind he repli by call himself pegasu, and 
form of prescrib work ‘har.’”

celia laugh. she wa surpris to find that mr. casaubon could 
someth quit amus.

“well, you know, he mai turn out a byron, a chatterton, 
churchil—that sort of thing—there’s no tell,” said mr. brook.
“shall you let him go to itali, or wherev els he want to go?”

“ye; i have agre to furnish him with moder suppli for a year 
so; he ask no more. i shall let him be tri by the test of freedom.”

“that is veri kind of you,” said dorothea, look up at mr. 
with delight. “it is nobl. after all, peopl mai realli have in 
some vocat which is not quit plain to themselv, mai thei not?
thei mai seem idl and weak becaus thei ar grow. we should be 
patient with each other, i think.”

“i suppos it is be engag to be marri that ha made you 
patienc good,” said celia, as soon as she and dorothea were 
togeth, take off their wrap.

“you mean that i am veri impati, celia.”

“ye; when peopl don’t do and sai just what you like.” celia 
becom less afraid of “sai thing” to dorothea sinc 
engag: clever seem to her more pitiabl than ever.




chapter x.

“he had catch a great cold, had he had no other cloth to wear 
the skin of a bear not yet kill.”—fuller.


young ladislaw did not pai that visit to which mr. brook had 
him, and onli six dai afterward mr. casaubon mention that hi 
rel had start for the contin, seem by thi cold 
to waiv inquiri. inde, will had declin to fix on ani more 
destin than the entir area of europ. geniu, he held, 
necessarili intoler of fetter: on the on hand it must have 
utmost plai for it spontan; on the other, it mai confid 
those messag from the univers which summon it to it peculiar work,
onli place itself in an attitud of recept toward all 
chanc. the attitud of recept ar variou, and will 
sincer tri mani of them. he wa not excess fond of wine, 
he had sever time taken too much, simpli as an experi in 
form of ecstasi; he had fast till he wa faint, and then sup 
lobster; he had made himself ill with dose of opium. noth 
origin had result from these measur; and the effect of the 
had convinc him that there wa an entir dissimilar between 
constitut and de quincei’s. the superad circumst which 
evolv the geniu had not yet come; the univers had not yet beckon.
even caesar’s fortun at on time wa but a grand presenti. we 
what a masquerad all develop is, and what effect shape mai 
disguis in helpless embryo. in fact, the world is full of 
analog and handsom dubiou egg call possibl. will 
clearli enough the pitiabl instanc of long incub produc 
chick, and but for gratitud would have laugh at casaubon, 
plod applic, row of note-book, and small taper of 
theori explor the toss ruin of the world, seem to enforc 
moral entir encourag to will’s gener relianc on 
intent of the univers with regard to himself. he held 
relianc to be a mark of geniu; and certainli it is no mark to 
contrari; geniu consist neither in self-conceit nor in humil,
but in a power to make or do, not anyth in gener, but someth 
particular. let him start for the contin, then, without 
pronounc on hi futur. among all form of mistak, propheci is 
most gratuit.

but at present thi caution against a too hasti judgment interest 
more in relat to mr. casaubon than to hi young cousin. if 
dorothea mr. casaubon had been the mere occas which had set 
the fine inflamm materi of her youth illus, doe it 
that he wa fairli repres in the mind of those less 
personag who have hitherto deliv their judgment concern him?
i protest against ani absolut conclus, ani prejudic deriv 
mr. cadwallad’s contempt for a neighbor clergyman’s 
great of soul, or sir jame chettam’s poor opinion of hi rival’
leg,—from mr. brook’s failur to elicit a companion’s idea, or 
celia’s critic of a middl-ag scholar’s person appear. i 
not sure that the greatest man of hi ag, if ever that 
superl exist, could escap these unfavor reflect 
himself in variou small mirror; and even milton, look for 
portrait in a spoon, must submit to have the facial angl of a bumpkin.
moreov, if mr. casaubon, speak for himself, ha rather a 
rhetor, it is not therefor certain that there is no good work 
fine feel in him. did not an immort physicist and interpret 
hieroglyph write detest vers? ha the theori of the solar 
been advanc by grace manner and convers tact? suppos 
turn from outsid estim of a man, to wonder, with keener interest,
what is the report of hi own conscious about hi do 
capac: with what hindranc he is carri on hi daili labor; 
fade of hope, or what deeper fixiti of self-delus the year 
mark off within him; and with what spirit he wrestl 
univers pressur, which will on dai be too heavi for him, and 
hi heart to it final paus. doubtless hi lot is import in hi 
ey; and the chief reason that we think he ask too larg a place 
our consider must be our want of room for him, sinc we refer 
to the divin regard with perfect confid; nai, it is even 
sublim for our neighbor to expect the utmost there, howev littl 
mai have got from us. mr. casaubon, too, wa the centr of hi 
world; if he wa liabl to think that other were providenti 
for him, and especi to consid them in the light of their 
for the author of a “kei to all mytholog,” thi trait is not 
alien to us, and, like the other mendic hope of mortal, 
some of our piti.

certainli thi affair of hi marriag with miss brook touch him 
nearli than it did ani on of the person who have hitherto shown 
disapprov of it, and in the present stage of thing i feel 
tenderli toward hi experi of success than toward 
disappoint of the amiabl sir jame. for in truth, as the dai 
for hi marriag came nearer, mr. casaubon did not find hi 
rise; nor did the contempl of that matrimoni garden scene,
where, as all experi show, the path wa to be border 
flower, prove persist more enchant to him than the 
vault where he walk taper in hand. he did not confess to himself,
still less could he have breath to anoth, hi surpris that 
he had won a love and nobl-heart girl he had not 
delight,—which he had also regard as an object to be found by search.
it is true that he knew all the classic passag impli 
contrari; but know classic passag, we find, is a mode of motion,
which explain why thei leav so littl extra forc for their 
applic.

poor mr. casaubon had imagin that hi long studiou bachelorhood 
store up for him a compound interest of enjoy, and that 
draft on hi affect would not fail to be honor; for we all 
us, grave or light, get our thought entangl in metaphor, and 
fatal on the strength of them. and now he wa in danger of 
sadden by the veri convict that hi circumst were 
happi: there wa noth extern by which he could account for 
certain blank of sensibl which came over him just when 
expect glad should have been most live, just when he 
the accustom dul of hi lowick librari for hi visit to 
grang. here wa a weari experi in which he wa as 
condemn to loneli as in the despair which sometim 
him while toil in the morass of authorship without seem nearer 
the goal. and hi wa that worst loneli which would shrink 
sympathi. he could not but wish that dorothea should think him not 
happi than the world would expect her success suitor to be; and 
relat to hi authorship he lean on her young trust and vener,
he like to draw forth her fresh interest in listen, as a mean 
encourag to himself: in talk to her he present all 
perform and intent with the reflect confid of 
pedagogu, and rid himself for the time of that chill ideal 
which crowd hi labori uncr hour with the vapor 
of tartarean shade.

for to dorothea, after that toi-box histori of the world adapt 
young ladi which had made the chief part of her educ, mr.
casaubon’s talk about hi great book wa full of new vista; and 
sens of revel, thi surpris of a nearer introduct to 
and alexandrian, as peopl who had idea not total unlik her own,
kept in abey for the time her usual eager for a bind 
which could bring her own life and doctrin into strict connect 
that amaz past, and give the remotest sourc of knowledg 
bear on her action. that more complet teach would come—mr.
casaubon would tell her all that: she wa look forward to 
initi in idea, as she wa look forward to marriag, 
blend her dim concept of both. it would be a great mistak 
suppos that dorothea would have care about ani share in mr.
casaubon’s learn as mere accomplish; for though opinion in 
neighborhood of freshitt and tipton had pronounc her clever, 
epithet would not have describ her to circl in whose more 
vocabulari clever impli mere aptitud for know and do,
apart from charact. all her eager for acquir lai within 
full current of sympathet motiv in which her idea and impuls 
habitu swept along. she did not want to deck herself 
knowledg—to wear it loos from the nerv and blood that fed 
action; and if she had written a book she must have done it as 
theresa did, under the command of an author that constrain 
conscienc. but someth she yearn for by which her life might 
fill with action at onc ration and ardent; and sinc the time 
gone by for guid vision and spiritu director, sinc 
heighten yearn but not instruct, what lamp wa there 
knowledg? sure learn men kept the onli oil; and who more 
than mr. casaubon?

thu in these brief week dorothea’s joyou grate expect 
unbroken, and howev her lover might occasion be consciou 
flat, he could never refer it to ani slacken of her 
interest.

the season wa mild enough to encourag the project of extend 
wed journei as far as rome, and mr. casaubon wa anxiou for 
becaus he wish to inspect some manuscript in the vatican.

“i still regret that your sister is not to accompani us,” he said 
morn, some time after it had been ascertain that celia object 
go, and that dorothea did not wish for her companionship. “you 
have mani lone hour, dorothea, for i shall be constrain to 
the utmost us of my time dure our stai in rome, and i should 
more at liberti if you had a companion.”

the word “i should feel more at liberti” grate on dorothea. for 
first time in speak to mr. casaubon she color from annoy.

“you must have misunderstood me veri much,” she said, “if you think 
should not enter into the valu of your time—if you think that i 
not willingli give up whatev interf with your us it to 
best purpos.”

“that is veri amiabl in you, my dear dorothea,” said mr. casaubon, 
in the least notic that she wa hurt; “but if you had a ladi as 
companion, i could put you both under the care of a ciceron, and 
could thu achiev two purpos in the same space of time.”

“i beg you will not refer to thi again,” said dorothea, 
haughtili. but immedi she fear that she wa wrong, and 
toward him she laid her hand on hi, ad in a differ tone, “
do not be anxiou about me. i shall have so much to think of when i 
alon. and tantripp will be a suffici companion, just to take 
of me. i could not bear to have celia: she would be miser.”

it wa time to dress. there wa to be a dinner-parti that dai, the 
of the parti which were held at the grang as proper preliminari 
the wed, and dorothea wa glad of a reason for move awai at 
on the sound of the bell, as if she need more than her usual 
of prepar. she wa asham of be irrit from some caus 
could not defin even to herself; for though she had no intent to 
untruth, her repli had not touch the real hurt within her. mr.
casaubon’s word had been quit reason, yet thei had brought 
vagu instantan sens of aloof on hi part.

“sure i am in a strang selfish weak state of mind,” she said 
herself. “how can i have a husband who is so much abov me 
know that he need me less than i need him?”

have convinc herself that mr. casaubon wa altogeth right, 
recov her equanim, and wa an agreeabl imag of seren 
when she came into the draw-room in her silver-grai dress—the 
line of her dark-brown hair part over her brow and coil 
behind, in keep with the entir absenc from her manner 
express of all search after mere effect. sometim when dorothea 
in compani, there seem to be as complet an air of repos about 
as if she had been a pictur of santa barbara look out from 
tower into the clear air; but these interv of quietud made 
energi of her speech and emot the more remark when some 
appeal had touch her.

she wa natur the subject of mani observ thi even, 
the dinner-parti wa larg and rather more miscellan as to the 
portion than ani which had been held at the grang sinc mr. brook’
niec had resid with him, so that the talk wa done in duo 
trio more or less inharmoni. there wa the newli elect mayor 
middlemarch, who happen to be a manufactur; the 
banker hi brother-in-law, who predomin so much in the town 
some call him a methodist, other a hypocrit, accord to 
resourc of their vocabulari; and there were variou profession men.
in fact, mr. cadwallad said that brook wa begin to treat 
middlemarch, and that she prefer the farmer at the tith-dinner,
who drank her health unpretenti, and were not asham of 
grandfath’ furnitur. for in that part of the countri, befor 
had done it notabl part in develop the polit conscious,
there wa a clearer distinct of rank and a dimmer distinct 
parti; so that mr. brook’s miscellan invit seem 
belong to that gener laxiti which came from hi inordin travel 
habit of take too much in the form of idea.

alreadi, as miss brook pass out of the dine-room, opportun 
found for some interject “asid.”

“a fine woman, miss brook! an uncommonli fine woman, by god!” said mr.
standish, the old lawyer, who had been so long concern with 
land gentri that he had becom land himself, and us that oath 
a deep-mouth manner as a sort of armori bear, stamp 
speech of a man who held a good posit.

mr. bulstrod, the banker, seem to be address, but that 
dislik coars and profan, and mere bow. the remark 
taken up by mr. chich, a middl-ag bachelor and 
celebr, who had a complexion someth like an easter egg, a 
hair carefulli arrang, and a carriag impli the conscious 
a distinguish appear.

“ye, but not my style of woman: i like a woman who lai herself out 
littl more to pleas us. there should be a littl filigre about 
woman—someth of the coquett. a man like a sort of challeng. 
more of a dead set she make at you the better.”

“there’s some truth in that,” said mr. standish, dispos to be genial.
“and, by god, it’s usual the wai with them. i suppos it answer 
wise end: provid made them so, eh, bulstrod?”

“i should be dispos to refer coquetri to anoth sourc,” said mr.
bulstrod. “i should rather refer it to the devil.”

“ay, to be sure, there should be a littl devil in a woman,” said mr.
chich, whose studi of the fair sex seem to have been 
to hi theologi. “and i like them blond, with a certain gait, and 
swan neck. between ourselv, the mayor’s daughter is more to my 
than miss brook or miss celia either. if i were a marri man 
should choos miss vinci befor either of them.”

“well, make up, make up,” said mr. standish, jocos; “you see 
middl-ag fellow carri the dai.”

mr. chich shook hi head with much mean: he wa not go 
incur the certainti of be accept by the woman he would choos.

the miss vinci who had the honor of be mr. chich’s ideal wa 
cours not present; for mr. brook, alwai object to go too far,
would not have chosen that hi niec should meet the daughter of 
middlemarch manufactur, unless it were on a public occas. 
feminin part of the compani includ none whom ladi chettam or mr.
cadwallad could object to; for mr. renfrew, the colonel’s widow, 
not onli unexception in point of breed, but also interest 
the ground of her complaint, which puzzl the doctor, and 
clearli a case wherein the ful of profession knowledg might 
the supplement of quackeri. ladi chettam, who attribut her 
remark health to home-made bitter unit with constant 
attend, enter with much exercis of the imagin into mr.
renfrew’s account of symptom, and into the amaz futil in 
case of all strengthen medicin.

“where can all the strength of those medicin go, my dear?” said 
mild but state dowag, turn to mr. cadwallad reflect,
when mr. renfrew’s attent wa call awai.

“it strengthen the diseas,” said the rector’s wife, much 
well-born not to be an amateur in medicin. “everyth depend on 
constitut: some peopl make fat, some blood, and some bile—that’s 
view of the matter; and whatev thei take is a sort of grist to 
mill.”

“then she ought to take medicin that would reduc—reduc the diseas,
you know, if you ar right, my dear. and i think what you sai 
reason.”

“certainli it is reason. you have two sort of potato, fed on 
same soil. on of them grow more and more wateri—”

“ah! like thi poor mr. renfrew—that is what i think. dropsi! there 
no swell yet—it is inward. i should sai she ought to take 
medicin, shouldn’t you?—or a dry hot-air bath. mani thing might 
tri, of a dry natur.”

“let her try a certain person’s pamphlet,” said mr. cadwallad in 
underton, see the gentlemen enter. “he doe not want dry.”

“who, my dear?” said ladi chettam, a charm woman, not so quick as 
nullifi the pleasur of explan.

“the bridegroom—casaubon. he ha certainli been dry up faster 
the engag: the flame of passion, i suppos.”

“i should think he is far from have a good constitut,” said 
chettam, with a still deeper underton. “and then hi studi—so 
dry, as you sai.”

“realli, by the side of sir jame, he look like a death’s head 
over for the occas. mark my word: in a year from thi time 
girl will hate him. she look up to him as an oracl now, and by-and-
she will be at the other extrem. all flighti!”

“how veri shock! i fear she is headstrong. but tell me—you know 
about him—is there anyth veri bad? what is the truth?”

“the truth? he is as bad as the wrong physic—nasti to take, and sure 
disagre.”

“there could not be anyth wors than that,” said ladi chettam, 
so vivid a concept of the physic that she seem to have 
someth exact about mr. casaubon’s disadvantag. “howev, 
will hear noth against miss brook. he sai she is the mirror 
women still.”

“that is a gener make-believ of hi. depend upon it, he 
littl celia better, and she appreci him. i hope you like my 
celia?”

“certainli; she is fonder of geranium, and seem more docil, 
not so fine a figur. but we were talk of physic. tell me about 
new young surgeon, mr. lydgat. i am told he is wonderfulli clever: 
certainli look it—a fine brow inde.”

“he is a gentleman. i heard him talk to humphrei. he talk well.”

“ye. mr. brook sai he is on of the lydgat of northumberland,
realli well connect. on doe not expect it in a practition of 
kind. for my own part, i like a medic man more on a foot with 
servant; thei ar often all the clever. i assur you i found 
hick’s judgment unfail; i never knew him wrong. he wa coars 
butcher-like, but he knew my constitut. it wa a loss to me 
go off so suddenli. dear me, what a veri anim convers 
brook seem to be have with thi mr. lydgat!”

“she is talk cottag and hospit with him,” said mr.
cadwallad, whose ear and power of interpret were quick. “
believ he is a sort of philanthropist, so brook is sure to take 
up.”

“jame,” said ladi chettam when her son came near, “bring mr. 
and introduc him to me. i want to test him.”

the affabl dowag declar herself delight with thi opportun 
make mr. lydgat’s acquaint, have heard of hi success 
treat fever on a new plan.

mr. lydgat had the medic accomplish of look perfectli 
whatev nonsens wa talk to him, and hi dark steadi ey gave 
impress as a listen. he wa as littl as possibl like 
lament hick, especi in a certain careless refin about 
toilet and utter. yet ladi chettam gather much confid in him.
he confirm her view of her own constitut as be peculiar, 
admit that all constitut might be call peculiar, and he 
not deni that her might be more peculiar than other. he did 
approv of a too lower system, includ reckless cup, nor, 
the other hand, of incess port wine and bark. he said “i think so”
with an air of so much defer accompani the insight of agreement,
that she form the most cordial opinion of hi talent.

“i am quit pleas with your proteg,” she said to mr. brook 
go awai.

“my proteg?—dear me!—who is that?” said mr. brook.

“thi young lydgat, the new doctor. he seem to me to understand 
profess admir.”

“oh, lydgat! he is not my proteg, you know; onli i knew an uncl 
hi who sent me a letter about him. howev, i think he is like to 
first-rate—ha studi in pari, knew broussai; ha idea, 
know—want to rais the profess.”

“lydgat ha lot of idea, quit new, about ventil and diet, 
sort of thing,” resum mr. brook, after he had hand out 
chettam, and had return to be civil to a group of middlemarch.

“hang it, do you think that is quit sound?—upset the 
treatment, which ha made englishmen what thei ar?” said mr. standish.

“medic knowledg is at a low ebb among us,” said mr. bulstrod, 
spoke in a subdu tone, and had rather a sickli air. “i, for my part,
hail the advent of mr. lydgat. i hope to find good reason 
confid the new hospit to hi manag.”

“that is all veri fine,” repli mr. standish, who wa not fond of mr.
bulstrod; “if you like him to try experi on your 
patient, and kill a few peopl for chariti i have no object. but 
am not go to hand monei out of my purs to have experi tri 
me. i like treatment that ha been test a littl.”

“well, you know, standish, everi dose you take is an experi-
experi, you know,” said mr. brook, nod toward the lawyer.

“oh, if you talk in that sens!” said mr. standish, with as 
disgust at such non-legal quibbl as a man can well betrai toward 
valuabl client.

“i should be glad of ani treatment that would cure me without 
me to a skeleton, like poor grainger,” said mr. vinci, the mayor, 
florid man, who would have serv for a studi of flesh in 
contrast with the franciscan tint of mr. bulstrod. “it’s 
uncommonli danger thing to be left without ani pad against 
shaft of diseas, as somebodi said,—and i think it a veri 
express myself.”

mr. lydgat, of cours, wa out of hear. he had quit the 
earli, and would have thought it altogeth tediou but for the 
of certain introduct, especi the introduct to miss brook,
whose youth bloom, with her approach marriag to that 
scholar, and her interest in matter social us, gave her 
piquanc of an unusu combin.

“she is a good creatur—that fine girl—but a littl too earnest,” 
thought. “it is troublesom to talk to such women. thei ar 
want reason, yet thei ar too ignor to understand the merit 
ani question, and usual fall back on their moral sens to 
thing after their own tast.”

evid miss brook wa not mr. lydgat’s style of woman ani 
than mr. chich’s. consid, inde, in relat to the latter,
whose mind wa matur, she wa altogeth a mistak, and calcul 
shock hi trust in final caus, includ the adapt of fine 
women to purplefac bachelor. but lydgat wa less ripe, and 
possibl have experi befor him which would modifi hi opinion 
to the most excel thing in woman.

miss brook, howev, wa not again seen by either of these 
under her maiden name. not long after that dinner-parti she had 
mr. casaubon, and wa on her wai to rome.




chapter xi.

but deed and languag such as men do us,
and person such as comedi would choos,
when she would show an imag of the time,
and sport with human folli, not with crime.
—ben jonson.


lydgat, in fact, wa alreadi consciou of be fascin by a 
strikingli differ from miss brook: he did not in the least 
that he had lost hi balanc and fallen in love, but he had said 
that particular woman, “she is grace itself; she is perfectli 
and accomplish. that is what a woman ought to be: she ought 
produc the effect of exquisit music.” plain women he regard as 
did the other sever fact of life, to be face with philosophi 
investig by scienc. but rosamond vinci seem to have the 
melod charm; and when a man ha seen the woman whom he would 
chosen if he had intend to marri speedili, hi remain a 
will usual depend on her resolut rather than on hi. 
believ that he should not marri for sever year: not marri until 
had trodden out a good clear path for himself awai from the broad 
which wa quit readi made. he had seen miss vinci abov hi 
almost as long as it had taken mr. casaubon to becom engag 
marri: but thi learn gentleman wa possess of a fortun; he 
assembl hi volumin note, and had made that sort of 
which preced perform,—often the larger part of a man’s fame. 
took a wife, as we have seen, to adorn the remain quadrant of 
cours, and be a littl moon that would caus hardli a 
perturb. but lydgat wa young, poor, ambiti. he had 
half-centuri befor him instead of behind him, and he had come 
middlemarch bent on do mani thing that were not directli fit 
make hi fortun or even secur him a good incom. to a man under 
circumst, take a wife is someth more than a question 
adorn, howev highli he mai rate thi; and lydgat wa dispos 
give it the first place among wife function. to hi tast, guid 
a singl convers, here wa the point on which miss brook would 
found want, notwithstand her undeni beauti. she did not 
at thing from the proper feminin angl. the societi of such women 
about as relax as go from your work to teach the second form,
instead of reclin in a paradis with sweet laugh for bird-note,
and blue ey for a heaven.

certainli noth at present could seem much less import to 
than the turn of miss brook’s mind, or to miss brook than 
qualiti of the woman who had attract thi young surgeon. but 
on watch keenli the stealthi converg of human lot, see a 
prepar of effect from on life on anoth, which tell like 
calcul ironi on the indiffer or the frozen stare with which 
look at our unintroduc neighbor. destini stand by sarcast with 
dramati persona fold in her hand.

old provinci societi had it share of thi subtl movement: had 
onli it strike downfal, it brilliant young profession 
who end by live up an entri with a drab and six children for 
establish, but also those less mark vicissitud which 
constantli shift the boundari of social intercours, and 
new conscious of interdepend. some slip a littl downward,
some got higher foot: peopl deni aspir, gain wealth, 
fastidi gentlemen stood for borough; some were caught in 
current, some in ecclesiast, and perhap found 
surprisingli group in consequ; while a few personag or 
that stood with rocki firm amid all thi fluctuat, were 
present new aspect in spite of solid, and alter with 
doubl chang of self and behold. municip town and rural 
gradual made fresh thread of connect—gradual, as the 
stock gave wai to the save-bank, and the worship of the 
guinea becam extinct; while squir and baronet, and even lord 
had onc live blamelessli afar from the civic mind, gather 
faulti of closer acquaintanceship. settler, too, came from 
counti, some with an alarm novelti of skill, other with 
offens advantag in cun. in fact, much the same sort of 
and mixtur went on in old england as we find in older herodotu, 
also, in tell what had been, thought it well to take a woman’s 
for hi start-point; though io, as a maiden appar beguil 
attract merchandis, wa the revers of miss brook, and in 
respect perhap bore more resembl to rosamond vinci, who 
excel tast in costum, with that nymph-like figur and 
blind which give the largest rang to choic in the flow and 
of draperi. but these thing made onli part of her charm. she 
admit to be the flower of mr. lemon’s school, the chief school 
the counti, where the teach includ all that wa demand in 
accomplish femal—even to extra, such as the get in and out of 
carriag. mr. lemon herself had alwai held up miss vinci as 
exampl: no pupil, she said, exceed that young ladi for 
acquisit and proprieti of speech, while her music execut 
quit except. we cannot help the wai in which peopl speak of us,
and probabl if mr. lemon had undertaken to describ juliet or imogen,
these heroin would not have seem poetic. the first vision 
rosamond would have been enough with most judg to dispel 
prejudic excit by mr. lemon’s prais.

lydgat could not be long in middlemarch without have that 
vision, or even without make the acquaint of the vinci famili;
for though mr. peacock, whose practic he had paid someth to 
on, had not been their doctor (mr. vinci not like the 
system adopt by him), he had mani patient among their 
and acquaint. for who of ani consequ in middlemarch wa 
connect or at least acquaint with the vinci? thei were 
manufactur, and had kept a good hous for three gener, 
which there had natur been much intermarri with neighbor 
or less decidedli genteel. mr. vinci’s sister had made a wealthi 
in accept mr. bulstrod, who, howev, as a man not born in 
town, and altogeth of dimli known origin, wa consid to have 
well in unit himself with a real middlemarch famili; on the 
hand, mr. vinci had descend a littl, have taken an innkeep’
daughter. but on thi side too there wa a cheer sens of monei; 
mr. vinci’s sister had been second wife to rich old mr. featherston,
and had di childless year ago, so that her nephew and niec 
be suppos to touch the affect of the widow. and it 
that mr. bulstrod and mr. featherston, two of peacock’s 
import patient, had, from differ caus, given an 
good recept to hi successor, who had rais some partisanship 
well as discuss. mr. wrench, medic attend to the vinci famili,
veri earli had ground for think lightli of lydgat’s 
discret, and there wa no report about him which wa not retail 
the vinci’, where visitor were frequent. mr. vinci wa more 
to gener good-fellowship than to take side, but there wa no 
for him to be hasti in make ani new man acquaint. 
silent wish that her father would invit mr. lydgat. she wa 
of the face and figur she had alwai been us to—the 
irregular profil and gait and turn of phrase distinguish 
middlemarch young men whom she had known as boi. she had been 
school with girl of higher posit, whose brother, she felt sure, 
would have been possibl for her to be more interest in, than 
these inevit middlemarch companion. but she would not have 
to mention her wish to her father; and he, for hi part, wa in 
hurri on the subject. an alderman about to be mayor must by-and-
enlarg hi dinner-parti, but at present there were plenti of 
at hi well-spread tabl.

that tabl often remain cover with the relic of the 
breakfast long after mr. vinci had gone with hi second son to 
warehous, and when miss morgan wa alreadi far on in morn 
with the younger girl in the schoolroom. it await the 
laggard, who found ani sort of inconveni (to other) 
disagre than get up when he wa call. thi wa the case 
morn of the octob in which we have late seen mr. 
visit the grang; and though the room wa a littl overh 
the fire, which had sent the spaniel pant to a remot corner,
rosamond, for some reason, continu to sit at her embroideri 
than usual, now and then give herself a littl shake, and lai 
work on her knee to contempl it with an air of hesit weari.
her mamma, who had return from an excurs to the kitchen, sat 
the other side of the small work-tabl with an air of more 
placid, until, the clock again give notic that it wa go 
strike, she look up from the lace-mend which wa occupi 
plump finger and rang the bell.

“knock at mr. fred’s door again, pritchard, and tell him it ha 
half-past ten.”

thi wa said without ani chang in the radiant good-humor of mr.
vinci’s face, in which forti-five year had delv neither angl 
parallel; and push back her pink capstr, she let her work 
on her lap, while she look admiringli at her daughter.

“mamma,” said rosamond, “when fred come down i wish you would not 
him have red her. i cannot bear the smell of them all over 
hous at thi hour of the morn.”

“oh, my dear, you ar so hard on your brother! it is the onli fault 
have to find with you. you ar the sweetest temper in the world, 
you ar so tetchi with your brother.”

“not tetchi, mamma: you never hear me speak in an unladylik wai.”

“well, but you want to deni them thing.”

“brother ar so unpleas.”

“oh, my dear, you must allow for young men. be thank if thei 
good heart. a woman must learn to put up with littl thing. you 
be marri some dai.”

“not to ani on who is like fred.”

“don’t decri your own brother, my dear. few young men have less 
them, although he couldn’t take hi degre—i’m sure i can’t 
why, for he seem to me most clever. and you know yourself he 
thought equal to the best societi at colleg. so particular as you ar,
my dear, i wonder you ar not glad to have such a gentlemanli young 
for a brother. you ar alwai find fault with bob becaus he is 
fred.”

“oh no, mamma, onli becaus he is bob.”

“well, my dear, you will not find ani middlemarch young man who ha 
someth against him.”

“but”—here rosamond’s face broke into a smile which suddenli 
two dimpl. she herself thought unfavor of these dimpl 
smile littl in gener societi. “but i shall not marri 
middlemarch young man.”

“so it seem, my love, for you have as good as refus the pick 
them; and if there’s better to be had, i’m sure there’s no girl 
deserv it.”

“excus me, mamma—i wish you would not sai, ‘the pick of them.’”

“why, what els ar thei?”

“i mean, mamma, it is rather a vulgar express.”

“veri like, my dear; i never wa a good speaker. what should i sai?”

“the best of them.”

“why, that seem just as plain and common. if i had had time to think,
i should have said, ‘the most superior young men.’ but with 
educ you must know.”

“what must rosi know, mother?” said mr. fred, who had slid 
unobserv through the half-open door while the ladi were 
over their work, and now go up to the fire stood with hi 
toward it, warm the sole of hi slipper.

“whether it’s right to sai ‘superior young men,’” said mr. vinci,
ring the bell.

“oh, there ar so mani superior tea and sugar now. superior 
get to be shopkeep’ slang.”

“ar you begin to dislik slang, then?” said rosamond, with 
graviti.

“onli the wrong sort. all choic of word is slang. it mark a class.”

“there is correct english: that is not slang.”

“i beg your pardon: correct english is the slang of prig who 
histori and essai. and the strongest slang of all is the slang 
poet.”

“you will sai anyth, fred, to gain your point.”

“well, tell me whether it is slang or poetri to call an ox 
_leg-plaiter_.”

“of cours you can call it poetri if you like.”

“aha, miss rosi, you don’t know homer from slang. i shall invent a 
game; i shall write bit of slang and poetri on slip, and give them 
you to separ.”

“dear me, how amus it is to hear young peopl talk!” said mr.
vinci, with cheer admir.

“have you got noth els for my breakfast, pritchard?” said fred, 
the servant who brought in coffe and butter toast; while he 
round the tabl survei the ham, pot beef, and other 
remnant, with an air of silent reject, and polit forbear 
sign of disgust.

“should you like egg, sir?”

“egg, no! bring me a grill bone.”

“realli, fred,” said rosamond, when the servant had left the room, “
you must have hot thing for breakfast, i wish you would come 
earlier. you can get up at six o’clock to go out hunt; i 
understand why you find it so difficult to get up on other morn.”

“that is your want of understand, rosi. i can get up to go 
becaus i like it.”

“what would you think of me if i came down two hour after everi 
els and order grill bone?”

“i should think you were an uncommonli fast young ladi,” said fred,
eat hi toast with the utmost composur.

“i cannot see why brother ar to make themselv disagre, 
more than sister.”

“i don’t make myself disagre; it is you who find me so.
disagre is a word that describ your feel and not 
action.”

“i think it describ the smell of grill bone.”

“not at all. it describ a sensat in your littl nose 
with certain finick notion which ar the classic of mr. lemon’
school. look at my mother; you don’t see her object to 
except what she doe herself. she is my notion of a pleasant woman.”

“bless you both, my dear, and don’t quarrel,” said mr. vinci, 
motherli cordial. “come, fred, tell us all about the new doctor. 
is your uncl pleas with him?”

“pretti well, i think. he ask lydgat all sort of question and 
screw up hi face while he hear the answer, as if thei were 
hi toe. that’s hi wai. ah, here come my grill bone.”

“but how came you to stai out so late, my dear? you onli said you 
go to your uncl’s.”

“oh, i dine at plymdal’s. we had whist. lydgat wa there too.”

“and what do you think of him? he is veri gentlemanli, i suppos. 
sai he is of excel famili—hi relat quit counti peopl.”

“ye,” said fred. “there wa a lydgat at john’s who spent no end 
monei. i find thi man is a second cousin of hi. but rich men mai 
veri poor devil for second cousin.”

“it alwai make a differ, though, to be of good famili,” 
rosamond, with a tone of decis which show that she had thought 
thi subject. rosamond felt that she might have been happier if she 
not been the daughter of a middlemarch manufactur. she 
anyth which remind her that her mother’s father had been 
innkeep. certainli ani on rememb the fact might think that mr.
vinci had the air of a veri handsom good-humor landladi, 
to the most caprici order of gentlemen.

“i thought it wa odd hi name wa tertiu,” said the bright-
matron, “but of cours it’s a name in the famili. but now, tell 
exactli what sort of man he is.”

“oh, tallish, dark, clever—talk well—rather a prig, i think.”

“i never can make out what you mean by a prig,” said rosamond.

“a fellow who want to show that he ha opinion.”

“why, my dear, doctor must have opinion,” said mr. vinci. “what 
thei there for els?”

“ye, mother, the opinion thei ar paid for. but a prig is a 
who is alwai make you a present of hi opinion.”

“i suppos mari garth admir mr. lydgat,” said rosamond, not 
a touch of innuendo.

“realli, i can’t sai.” said fred, rather glumli, as he left the tabl,
and take up a novel which he had brought down with him, threw 
into an arm-chair. “if you ar jealou of her, go often to 
court yourself and eclips her.”

“i wish you would not be so vulgar, fred. if you have finish, 
ring the bell.”

“it is true, though—what your brother sai, rosamond,” mr. 
began, when the servant had clear the tabl. “it is a thousand 
you haven’t patienc to go and see your uncl more, so proud of you 
he is, and want you to live with him. there’s no know what 
might have done for you as well as for fred. god know, i’m fond 
have you at home with me, but i can part with my children for 
good. and now it stand to reason that your uncl featherston will 
someth for mari garth.”

“mari garth can bear be at stone court, becaus she like 
better than be a gover,” said rosamond, fold up her work. “
would rather not have anyth left to me if i must earn it by 
much of my uncl’s cough and hi ugli relat.”

“he can’t be long for thi world, my dear; i wouldn’t hasten hi end,
but what with asthma and that inward complaint, let us hope there 
someth better for him in anoth. and i have no ill-will 
mari garth, but there’s justic to be thought of. and mr.
featherston’s first wife brought him no monei, as my sister did. 
niec and nephew can’t have so much claim as my sister’s. and i 
sai i think mari garth a dread plain girl—more fit for a gover.”

“everi on would not agre with you there, mother,” said fred, 
seem to be abl to read and listen too.

“well, my dear,” said mr. vinci, wheel skilfulli, “if she _had_
some fortun left her,—a man marri hi wife’s relat, and 
garth ar so poor, and live in such a small wai. but i shall leav 
to your studi, my dear; for i must go and do some shop.”

“fred’s studi ar not veri deep,” said rosamond, rise with 
mamma, “he is onli read a novel.”

“well, well, by-and-by he’ll go to hi latin and thing,” said mr.
vinci, soothingli, stroke her son’s head. “there’s a fire in 
smoke-room on purpos. it’s your father’s wish, you know—fred, 
dear—and i alwai tell him you will be good, and go to colleg again 
take your degre.”

fred drew hi mother’s hand down to hi lip, but said noth.

“i suppos you ar not go out ride to-dai?” said rosamond,
linger a littl after her mamma wa gone.

“no; why?”

“papa sai i mai have the chestnut to ride now.”

“you can go with me to-morrow, if you like. onli i am go to 
court, rememb.”

“i want to ride so much, it is indiffer to me where we go.” 
realli wish to go to stone court, of all other place.

“oh, i sai, rosi,” said fred, as she wa pass out of the room, “
you ar go to the piano, let me come and plai some air with you.”

“prai do not ask me thi morn.”

“why not thi morn?”

“realli, fred, i wish you would leav off plai the flute. a 
look veri silli plai the flute. and you plai so out of tune.”

“when next ani on make love to you, miss rosamond, i will tell 
how oblig you ar.”

“why should you expect me to oblig you by hear you plai the flute,
ani more than i should expect you to oblig me by not plai it?”

“and why should you expect me to take you out ride?”

thi question led to an adjust, for rosamond had set her mind 
that particular ride.

so fred wa gratifi with nearli an hour’s practic of “ar hyd y no,”
“ye bank and brae,” and other favorit air from hi “instructor 
the flute;” a wheezi perform, into which he threw much ambit 
an irrepress hope.




chapter xii.

he had more tow on hi 
than gervei knew.
—chaucer.


the ride to stone court, which fred and rosamond took the next morn,
lai through a pretti bit of midland landscap, almost all meadow 
pastur, with hedgerow still allow to grow in bushi beauti and 
spread out coral fruit for the bird. littl detail gave each field 
particular physiognomi, dear to the ey that have look on them 
childhood: the pool in the corner where the grass were dank and 
lean whisperingli; the great oak shadow a bare place 
mid-pastur; the high bank where the ash-tree grew; the sudden 
of the old marl-pit make a red background for the burdock; 
huddl roof and rick of the homestead without a traceabl wai 
approach; the grai gate and fenc against the depth of the 
wood; and the strai hovel, it old, old thatch full of mossi hill 
vallei with wondrou modul of light and shadow such as we 
far to see in later life, and see larger, but not more beauti. 
ar the thing that make the gamut of joi in landscap to midland-
soul—the thing thei toddl among, or perhap learn by 
stand between their father’s knee while he drove leisur.

but the road, even the byroad, wa excel; for lowick, as we 
seen, wa not a parish of muddi lane and poor tenant; and it wa 
lowick parish that fred and rosamond enter after a coupl of mile’
ride. anoth mile would bring them to stone court, and at the end 
the first half, the hous wa alreadi visibl, look as if it 
been arrest in it growth toward a stone mansion by an 
bud of farm-build on it left flank, which had hinder it 
becom anyth more than the substanti dwell of a 
farmer. it wa not the less agreeabl an object in the distanc for 
cluster of pinnacl corn-rick which balanc the fine row of 
on the right.

present it wa possibl to discern someth that might be a gig 
the circular drive befor the front door.

“dear me,” said rosamond, “i hope none of my uncl’s horribl 
ar there.”

“thei ar, though. that is mr. waul’s gig—the last yellow gig left, 
should think. when i see mr. waul in it, i understand how yellow 
have been worn for mourn. that gig seem to me more funer than 
hears. but then mr. waul alwai ha black crape on. how doe 
manag it, rosi? her friend can’t alwai be dy.”

“i don’t know at all. and she is not in the least evangel,” 
rosamond, reflect, as if that religi point of view would 
fulli account for perpetu crape. “and, not poor,” she ad, 
a moment’s paus.

“no, by georg! thei ar as rich as jew, those waul 
featherston; i mean, for peopl like them, who don’t want to 
anyth. and yet thei hang about my uncl like vultur, and 
afraid of a farth go awai from their side of the famili. but 
believ he hate them all.”

the mr. waul who wa so far from be admir in the ey of 
distant connect, had happen to sai thi veri morn (not at 
with a defiant air, but in a low, muffl, neutral tone, as of a 
heard through cotton wool) that she did not wish “to enjoi their 
opinion.” she wa seat, as she observ, on her own brother’s hearth,
and had been jane featherston five-and-twenti year befor she 
been jane waul, which entitl her to speak when her own brother’
name had been made free with by those who had no right to it.

“what ar you drive at there?” said mr. featherston, hold 
stick between hi knee and settl hi wig, while he gave her 
momentari sharp glanc, which seem to react on him like a draught 
cold air and set him cough.

mr. waul had to defer her answer till he wa quiet again, till 
garth had suppli him with fresh syrup, and he had begun to rub 
gold knob of hi stick, look bitterli at the fire. it wa a 
fire, but it made no differ to the chill-look purplish tint 
mr. waul’s face, which wa as neutral as her voic; have 
chink for ey, and lip that hardli move in speak.

“the doctor can’t master that cough, brother. it’s just like what 
have; for i’m your own sister, constitut and everyth. but, as 
wa sai, it’s a piti mr. vinci’s famili can’t be better conduct.”

“tchah! you said noth o’ the sort. you said somebodi had made 
with my name.”

“and no more than can be prove, if what everybodi sai is true. 
brother solomon tell me it’s the talk up and down in middlemarch 
unsteadi young vinci is, and ha been forev gambl at 
sinc home he came.”

“nonsens! what’s a game at billiard? it’s a good gentlemanli game;
and young vinci is not a clodhopp. if your son john took 
billiard, now, he’d make a fool of himself.”

“your nephew john never took to billiard or ani other game, brother,
and is far from lose hundr of pound, which, if what 
sai is true, must be found somewher els than out of mr. vinci 
father’s pocket. for thei sai he’s been lose monei for year, 
nobodi would think so, to see him go cours and keep open hous 
thei do. and i’ve heard sai mr. bulstrod condemn mr. vinci 
anyth for her flighti, and spoil her children so.”

“what’s bulstrod to me? i don’t bank with him.”

“well, mr. bulstrod is mr. vinci’s own sister, and thei do sai 
mr. vinci mostli trade on the bank monei; and you mai see yourself,
brother, when a woman past forti ha pink string alwai fly, 
that light wai of laugh at everyth, it’s veri unbecom. 
indulg your children is on thing, and find monei to pai 
debt is anoth. and it’s openli said that young vinci ha 
monei on hi expect. i don’t sai what expect. miss 
hear me, and is welcom to tell again. i know young peopl 
togeth.”

“no, thank you, mr. waul,” said mari garth. “i dislik 
scandal too much to wish to repeat it.”

mr. featherston rub the knob of hi stick and made a 
convuls show of laughter, which had much the same genuin as 
old whist-player’s chuckl over a bad hand. still look at the fire,
he said—

“and who pretend to sai fred vinci hasn’t got expect? such 
fine, spirit fellow is like enough to have ’em.”

there wa a slight paus befor mr. waul repli, and when she 
so, her voic seem to be slightli moisten with tear, though 
face wa still dry.

“whether or no, brother, it is natur pain to me and my 
solomon to hear your name made free with, and your complaint be 
as mai carri you off sudden, and peopl who ar no more 
than the merri-andrew at the fair, openli reckon on your 
come to _them_. and me your own sister, and solomon your own brother!
and if that’s to be it, what ha it pleas the almighti to 
famili for?” here mr. waul’s tear fell, but with moder.

“come, out with it, jane!” said mr. featherston, look at her. “
mean to sai, fred vinci ha been get somebodi to advanc him 
on what he sai he know about my will, eh?”

“i never said so, brother” (mr. waul’s voic had again becom dry 
unshaken). “it wa told me by my brother solomon last night when 
call come from market to give me advic about the old wheat, 
be a widow, and my son john onli three-and-twenti, though 
beyond anyth. and he had it from most undeni author, and 
on, but mani.”

“stuff and nonsens! i don’t believ a word of it. it’s all a got-
stori. go to the window, missi; i thought i heard a hors. see if 
doctor’s come.”

“not got up by me, brother, nor yet by solomon, who, whatev els 
mai be—and i don’t deni he ha odditi—ha made hi will and 
hi properti equal between such kin as he’s friend with; though, 
my part, i think there ar time when some should be consid 
than other. but solomon make it no secret what he mean to do.”

“the more fool he!” said mr. featherston, with some difficulti;
break into a sever fit of cough that requir mari garth 
stand near him, so that she did not find out whose hors thei 
which present paus stamp on the gravel befor the door.

befor mr. featherston’s cough wa quiet, rosamond enter, bear 
her ride-habit with much grace. she bow ceremoni to mr.
waul, who said stiffli, “how do you do, miss?” smile and 
silent to mari, and remain stand till the cough should ceas,
and allow her uncl to notic her.

“heydai, miss!” he said at last, “you have a fine color. where’s fred?”

“see about the hors. he will be in present.”

“sit down, sit down. mr. waul, you’d better go.”

even those neighbor who had call peter featherston an old fox, 
never accus him of be insincer polit, and hi sister wa 
us to the peculiar absenc of ceremoni with which he mark hi 
of blood-relationship. inde, she herself wa accustom to think 
entir freedom from the necess of behav agreeabl wa includ 
the almighti’s intent about famili. she rose slowli without 
sign of resent, and said in her usual muffl monoton, “brother, 
hope the new doctor will be abl to do someth for you. solomon 
there’s great talk of hi clever. i’m sure it’s my wish you 
be spare. and there’s none more readi to nurs you than your 
sister and your own niec, if you’d onli sai the word. there’
rebecca, and joanna, and elizabeth, you know.”

“ay, ay, i rememb—you’ll see i’ve rememb ’em all—all dark 
ugli. thei’d need have some monei, eh? there never wa ani beauti 
the women of our famili; but the featherston have alwai had 
monei, and the waul too. waul had monei too. a warm man wa waul.
ay, ay; monei’s a good egg; and if you’ve got monei to leav 
you, lai it in a warm nest. good-by, mr. waul.” here mr. 
pull at both side of hi wig as if he want to deafen himself, 
hi sister went awai rumin on thi oracular speech of hi.
notwithstand her jealousi of the vinci and of mari garth, 
remain as the nethermost sediment in her mental shallow a 
that her brother peter featherston could never leav hi 
properti awai from hi blood-relat:—els, why had the 
carri off hi two wive both childless, after he had gain so 
by manganes and thing, turn up when nobodi expect it?—and 
wa there a lowick parish church, and the waul and powderel 
sit in the same pew for gener, and the featherston pew 
to them, if, the sundai after her brother peter’s death, everybodi 
to know that the properti wa gone out of the famili? the human 
ha at no period accept a moral chao; and so preposter a 
wa not strictli conceiv. but we ar frighten at much that is 
strictli conceiv.

when fred came in the old man ei him with a peculiar twinkl, 
the younger had often had reason to interpret as pride in 
satisfactori detail of hi appear.

“you two miss go awai,” said mr. featherston. “i want to speak 
fred.”

“come into my room, rosamond, you will not mind the cold for a 
while,” said mari. the two girl had not onli known each other 
childhood, but had been at the same provinci school togeth (mari 
an articl pupil), so that thei had mani memori in common, and 
veri well to talk in privat. inde, thi _tête-à-tête_ wa on 
rosamond’s object in come to stone court.

old featherston would not begin the dialogu till the door had 
close. he continu to look at fred with the same twinkl and with 
of hi habitu grimac, altern screw and widen hi mouth;
and when he spoke, it wa in a low tone, which might be taken for 
of an inform readi to be bought off, rather than for the tone of 
offend senior. he wa not a man to feel ani strong moral 
even on account of trespass against himself. it wa natur 
other should want to get an advantag over him, but then, he wa 
littl too cun for them.

“so, sir, you’ve been pai ten per cent for monei which you’
promis to pai off by mortgag my land when i’m dead and gone, eh?
you put my life at a twelvemonth, sai. but i can alter my will yet.”

fred blush. he had not borrow monei in that wai, for 
reason. but he wa consciou of have spoken with some 
(perhap with more than he exactli rememb) about hi prospect 
get featherston’s land as a futur mean of pai present debt.

“i don’t know what you refer to, sir. i have certainli never 
ani monei on such an insecur. pleas do explain.”

“no, sir, it’s you must explain. i can alter my will yet, let me 
you. i’m of sound mind—can reckon compound interest in my head, 
rememb everi fool’s name as well as i could twenti year ago. 
the deuc? i’m under eighti. i sai, you must contradict thi stori.”

“i have contradict it, sir,” fred answer, with a touch 
impati, not rememb that hi uncl did not 
discrimin contradict from disprov, though no on wa 
from confound the two idea than old featherston, who 
wonder that so mani fool took hi own assert for proof. “but 
contradict it again. the stori is a silli lie.”

“nonsens! you must bring dockiment. it come from author.”

“name the author, and make him name the man of whom i borrow 
monei, and then i can disprov the stori.”

“it’s pretti good author, i think—a man who know most of what 
on in middlemarch. it’s that fine, religi, charit uncl o’
your. come now!” here mr. featherston had hi peculiar inward 
which signifi merriment.

“mr. bulstrod?”

“who els, eh?”

“then the stori ha grown into thi lie out of some sermon 
he mai have let fall about me. do thei pretend that he name the 
who lent me the monei?”

“if there is such a man, depend upon it bulstrod know him. but,
suppos you onli tri to get the monei lent, and didn’t 
it—bulstrod ’ud know that too. you bring me a write from 
to sai he doesn’t believ you’ve ever promis to pai your debt out o’
my land. come now!”

mr. featherston’s face requir it whole scale of grimac as 
muscular outlet to hi silent triumph in the sound of 
faculti.

fred felt himself to be in a disgust dilemma.

“you must be joke, sir. mr. bulstrod, like other men, 
score of thing that ar not true, and he ha a prejudic against me.
i could easili get him to write that he knew no fact in proof of 
report you speak of, though it might lead to unpleas. but 
could hardli ask him to write down what he believ or doe not 
about me.” fred paus an instant, and then ad, in polit appeal 
hi uncl’s vaniti, “that is hardli a thing for a gentleman to ask.”
but he wa disappoint in the result.

“ay, i know what you mean. you’d sooner offend me than bulstrod. 
what’s he?—he’s got no land hereabout that ever i heard tell of. 
speckil fellow! he mai come down ani dai, when the devil 
off back him. and that’s what hi religion mean: he want 
a’mighti to come in. that’s nonsens! there’s on thing i made 
pretti clear when i us to go to church—and it’s thi: god a’
stick to the land. he promis land, and he give land, and he 
chap rich with corn and cattl. but you take the other side. you 
bulstrod and speckil better than featherston and land.”

“i beg your pardon, sir,” said fred, rise, stand with hi back 
the fire and beat hi boot with hi whip. “i like neither 
nor specul.” he spoke rather sulkili, feel himself stalem.

“well, well, you can do without me, that’s pretti clear,” said 
featherston, secretli dislik the possibl that fred would 
himself at all independ. “you neither want a bit of land to make 
squir of you instead of a starv parson, nor a lift of a 
pound by the wai. it’s all on to me. i can make five codicil if 
like, and i shall keep my bank-note for a nest-egg. it’s all on 
me.”

fred color again. featherston had rare given him present 
monei, and at thi moment it seem almost harder to part with 
immedi prospect of bank-note than with the more distant prospect 
the land.

“i am not ungrat, sir. i never meant to show disregard for ani 
intent you might have toward me. on the contrari.”

“veri good. then prove it. you bring me a letter from bulstrod 
he doesn’t believ you’ve been crack and promis to pai your 
out o’ my land, and then, if there’s ani scrape you’ve got into, we’
see if i can’t back you a bit. come now! that’s a bargain. here, 
me your arm. i’ll try and walk round the room.”

fred, in spite of hi irrit, had kind enough in him to be 
littl sorri for the unlov, unvener old man, who with 
dropsic leg look more than usual pitiabl in walk. 
give hi arm, he thought that he should not himself like to be an 
fellow with hi constitut break up; and he 
good-temperedli, first befor the window to hear the wont 
about the guinea-fowl and the weather-cock, and then befor the 
book-shelv, of which the chief glori in dark calf were josephu,
culpepp, klopstock’s “messiah,” and sever volum of 
“gentleman’s magazin.”

“read me the name o’ the book. come now! you’re a colleg man.”

fred gave him the titl.

“what did missi want with more book? what must you be bring 
more book for?”

“thei amus her, sir. she is veri fond of read.”

“a littl too fond,” said mr. featherston, captious. “she wa 
read when she sat with me. but i put a stop to that. she’s got 
newspap to read out loud. that’s enough for on dai, i should think.
i can’t abid to see her read to herself. you mind and not bring 
ani more book, do you hear?”

“ye, sir, i hear.” fred had receiv thi order befor, and 
secretli disobei it. he intend to disobei it again.

“ring the bell,” said mr. featherston; “i want missi to come down.”

rosamond and mari had been talk faster than their male friend. 
did not think of sit down, but stood at the toilet-tabl near 
window while rosamond took off her hat, adjust her veil, and 
littl touch of her finger-tip to her hair—hair of 
fair, neither flaxen nor yellow. mari garth seem all the 
stand at an angl between the two nymph—the on in the glass, 
the on out of it, who look at each other with ey of heavenli blue,
deep enough to hold the most exquisit mean an ingeni 
could put into them, and deep enough to hide the mean of the 
if these should happen to be less exquisit. onli a few children 
middlemarch look blond by the side of rosamond, and the slim 
displai by her ride-habit had delic undul. in fact, 
men in middlemarch, except her brother, held that miss vinci wa 
best girl in the world, and some call her an angel. mari garth, 
the contrari, had the aspect of an ordinari sinner: she wa brown; 
curli dark hair wa rough and stubborn; her statur wa low; and 
would not be true to declar, in satisfactori antithesi, that she 
all the virtu. plain ha it peculiar temptat and vice 
as much as beauti; it is apt either to feign amiabl, or, 
feign it, to show all the repuls of discont: at ani rate,
to be call an ugli thing in contrast with that love creatur 
companion, is apt to produc some effect beyond a sens of 
verac and fit in the phrase. at the ag of two-and-twenti 
had certainli not attain that perfect good sens and good 
which ar usual recommend to the less fortun girl, as if 
were to be obtain in quantiti readi mix, with a flavor 
resign as requir. her shrewd had a streak of 
bitter continu renew and never carri utterli out of sight,
except by a strong current of gratitud toward those who, instead 
tell her that she ought to be content, did someth to make 
so. advanc womanhood had temper her plain, which wa of a 
human sort, such as the mother of our race have veri commonli worn 
all latitud under a more or less becom headgear. rembrandt 
have paint her with pleasur, and would have made her broad 
look out of the canva with intellig honesti. for honesti,
truth-tell fair, wa mari’s reign virtu: she neither 
to creat illus, nor indulg in them for her own behoof, and 
she wa in a good mood she had humor enough in her to laugh at herself.
when she and rosamond happen both to be reflect in the glass, 
said, laughingli—

“what a brown patch i am by the side of you, rosi! you ar the 
unbecom companion.”

“oh no! no on think of your appear, you ar so sensibl 
us, mari. beauti is of veri littl consequ in realiti,” 
rosamond, turn her head toward mari, but with ey swerv 
the new view of her neck in the glass.

“you mean _my_ beauti,” said mari, rather sardon.

rosamond thought, “poor mari, she take the kindest thing ill.” 
she said, “what have you been do late?”

“i? oh, mind the hous—pour out syrup—pretend to be 
and content—learn to have a bad opinion of everybodi.”

“it is a wretch life for you.”

“no,” said mari, curtli, with a littl toss of her head. “i think 
life is pleasant than your miss morgan’s.”

“ye; but miss morgan is so uninterest, and not young.”

“she is interest to herself, i suppos; and i am not at all 
that everyth get easier as on get older.”

“no,” said rosamond, reflect; “on wonder what such peopl do,
without ani prospect. to be sure, there is religion as a support. but,”
she ad, dimpl, “it is veri differ with you, mari. you mai 
an offer.”

“ha ani on told you he mean to make me on?”

“of cours not. i mean, there is a gentleman who mai fall in love 
you, see you almost everi dai.”

a certain chang in mari’s face wa chiefli determin by the 
not to show ani chang.

“doe that alwai make peopl fall in love?” she answer, carelessli;
“it seem to me quit as often a reason for detest each other.”

“not when thei ar interest and agreeabl. i hear that mr. 
is both.”

“oh, mr. lydgat!” said mari, with an unmistak laps 
indiffer. “you want to know someth about him,” she ad, 
choos to indulg rosamond’s indirect.

“mere, how you like him.”

“there is no question of like at present. my like alwai want 
littl kind to kindl it. i am not magnanim enough to 
peopl who speak to me without seem to see me.”

“is he so haughti?” said rosamond, with heighten satisfact. “
know that he is of good famili?”

“no; he did not give that as a reason.”

“mari! you ar the oddest girl. but what sort of look man is he?
describ him to me.”

“how can on describ a man? i can give you an inventori: 
eyebrow, dark ey, a straight nose, thick dark hair, larg 
white hand—and—let me see—oh, an exquisit 
pocket-handkerchief. but you will see him. you know thi is about 
time of hi visit.”

rosamond blush a littl, but said, medit, “i rather like 
haughti manner. i cannot endur a rattl young man.”

“i did not tell you that mr. lydgat wa haughti; but _il y en a 
tou le goût_, as littl mamsel us to sai, and if ani girl 
choos the particular sort of conceit she would like, i should think 
is you, rosi.”

“haughti is not conceit; i call fred conceit.”

“i wish no on said ani wors of him. he should be more care. mr.
waul ha been tell uncl that fred is veri unsteadi.” mari 
from a girlish impuls which got the better of her judgment. there 
a vagu uneasi associ with the word “unsteadi” which she 
rosamond might sai someth to dissip. but she purpos 
from mention mr. waul’s more special insinu.

“oh, fred is horrid!” said rosamond. she would not have allow 
so unsuit a word to ani on but mari.

“what do you mean by horrid?”

“he is so idl, and make papa so angri, and sai he will not 
order.”

“i think fred is quit right.”

“how can you sai he is quit right, mari? i thought you had more 
of religion.”

“he is not fit to be a clergyman.”

“but he ought to be fit.”—“well, then, he is not what he ought to be. 
know some other peopl who ar in the same case.”

“but no on approv of them. i should not like to marri a clergyman;
but there must be clergymen.”

“it doe not follow that fred must be on.”

“but when papa ha been at the expens of educ him for it! 
onli suppos, if he should have no fortun left him?”

“i can suppos that veri well,” said mari, dryli.

“then i wonder you can defend fred,” said rosamond, inclin to 
thi point.

“i don’t defend him,” said mari, laugh; “i would defend ani 
from have him for a clergyman.”

“but of cours if he were a clergyman, he must be differ.”

“ye, he would be a great hypocrit; and he is not that yet.”

“it is of no us sai anyth to you, mari. you alwai take fred’
part.”

“why should i not take hi part?” said mari, light up. “he 
take mine. he is the onli person who take the least troubl to 
me.”

“you make me feel veri uncomfort, mari,” said rosamond, with 
gravest mild; “i would not tell mamma for the world.”

“what would you not tell her?” said mari, angrili.

“prai do not go into a rage, mari,” said rosamond, mildli as ever.

“if your mamma is afraid that fred will make me an offer, tell her 
i would not marri him if he ask me. but he is not go to do so,
that i am awar. he certainli never ha ask me.”

“mari, you ar alwai so violent.”

“and you ar alwai so exasper.”

“i? what can you blame me for?”

“oh, blameless peopl ar alwai the most exasper. there is 
bell—i think we must go down.”

“i did not mean to quarrel,” said rosamond, put on her hat.

“quarrel? nonsens; we have not quarrel. if on is not to get into 
rage sometim, what is the good of be friend?”

“am i to repeat what you have said?”

“just as you pleas. i never sai what i am afraid of have repeat.
but let us go down.”

mr. lydgat wa rather late thi morn, but the visitor stai 
enough to see him; for mr. featherston ask rosamond to sing to him,
and she herself wa so kind as to propos a second favorit song 
hi—“flow on, thou shine river”—after she had sung “home, sweet home”
(which she detest). thi hard-head old overreach approv of 
sentiment song, as the suitabl garnish for girl, and also 
fundament fine, sentiment be the right thing for a song.

mr. featherston wa still applaud the last perform, 
assur missi that her voic wa as clear as a blackbird’s, when mr.
lydgat’s hors pass the window.

hi dull expect of the usual disagre routin with an 
patient—who can hardli believ that medicin would not “set him up” 
the doctor were onli clever enough—ad to hi gener disbelief 
middlemarch charm, made a doubli effect background to thi 
of rosamond, whom old featherston made hast ostentati 
introduc as hi niec, though he had never thought it worth while 
speak of mari garth in that light. noth escap lydgat 
rosamond’s grace behavior: how delic she waiv the 
which the old man’s want of tast had thrust upon her by a 
graviti, not show her dimpl on the wrong occas, but 
them afterward in speak to mari, to whom she address herself 
so much good-natur interest, that lydgat, after quickli 
mari more fulli than he had done befor, saw an ador kind 
rosamond’s ey. but mari from some caus look rather out of temper.

“miss rosi ha been sing me a song—you’ve noth to sai 
that, eh, doctor?” said mr. featherston. “i like it better than 
physic.”

“that ha made me forget how the time wa go,” said rosamond, 
to reach her hat, which she had laid asid befor sing, so that 
flower-like head on it white stem wa seen in perfect abov 
ride-habit. “fred, we must realli go.”

“veri good,” said fred, who had hi own reason for not be in 
best spirit, and want to get awai.

“miss vinci is a musician?” said lydgat, follow her with hi ey.
(everi nerv and muscl in rosamond wa adjust to the 
that she wa be look at. she wa by natur an actress of 
that enter into her _physiqu:_ she even act her own charact, 
so well, that she did not know it to be precis her own.)

“the best in middlemarch, i’ll be bound,” said mr. featherston, “
the next be who she will. eh, fred? speak up for your sister.”

“i’m afraid i’m out of court, sir. my evid would be good 
noth.”

“middlemarch ha not a veri high standard, uncl,” said rosamond, 
a pretti light, go toward her whip, which lai at a distanc.

lydgat wa quick in anticip her. he reach the whip befor 
did, and turn to present it to her. she bow and look at him: 
of cours wa look at her, and their ey met with that 
meet which is never arriv at by effort, but seem like a 
divin clearanc of haze. i think lydgat turn a littl paler 
usual, but rosamond blush deepli and felt a certain astonish.
after that, she wa realli anxiou to go, and did not know what sort 
stupid her uncl wa talk of when she went to shake hand 
him.

yet thi result, which she took to be a mutual impress, 
fall in love, wa just what rosamond had contempl beforehand.
ever sinc that import new arriv in middlemarch she had woven 
littl futur, of which someth like thi scene wa the 
begin. stranger, whether wreck and cling to a raft, or 
escort and accompani by portmanteau, have alwai had 
circumstanti fascin for the virgin mind, against which 
merit ha urg itself in vain. and a stranger wa absolut 
to rosamond’s social romanc, which had alwai turn on a lover 
bridegroom who wa not a middlemarch, and who had no connect 
all like her own: of late, inde, the construct seem to 
that he should somehow be relat to a baronet. now that she and 
stranger had met, realiti prove much more move than anticip,
and rosamond could not doubt that thi wa the great epoch of her life.
she judg of her own symptom as those of awaken love, and she 
it still more natur that mr. lydgat should have fallen in love 
first sight of her. these thing happen so often at ball, and 
not by the morn light, when the complexion show all the better 
it? rosamond, though no older than mari, wa rather us to 
fallen in love with; but she, for her part, had remain 
and fastidi critic toward both fresh sprig and fade bachelor.
and here wa mr. lydgat suddenli correspond to her ideal, 
altogeth foreign to middlemarch, carri a certain air 
distinct congruou with good famili, and possess 
which offer vista of that middl-class heaven, rank; a man 
talent, also, whom it would be especi delight to enslav: 
fact, a man who had touch her natur quit newli, and brought a 
interest into her life which wa better than ani fanci “might-be”
such as she wa in the habit of oppos to the actual.

thu, in ride home, both the brother and the sister were 
and inclin to be silent. rosamond, whose basi for her structur 
the usual airi slight, wa of remark detail and 
imagin when the foundat had been onc presuppos; and 
thei had ridden a mile she wa far on in the costum and 
of her wed life, have determin on her hous in middlemarch, 
foreseen the visit she would pai to her husband’s high-bred 
at a distanc, whose finish manner she could appropri 
thoroughli as she had done her school accomplish, 
herself thu for vaguer elev which might ultim come. 
wa noth financi, still less sordid, in her previs: she 
about what were consid refin, and not about the monei 
wa to pai for them.

fred’s mind, on the other hand, wa busi with an anxieti which even 
readi hope could not immedi quell. he saw no wai of 
featherston’s stupid demand without incur consequ which 
like less even than the task of fulfil it. hi father wa 
out of humor with him, and would be still more so if he were 
occas of ani addit cool between hi own famili and 
bulstrod. then, he himself hate have to go and speak to hi 
bulstrod, and perhap after drink wine he had said mani 
thing about featherston’s properti, and these had been magnifi 
report. fred felt that he made a wretch figur as a fellow 
brag about expect from a queer old miser like featherston,
and went to beg for certif at hi bid. but—
expect! he realli had them, and he saw no agreeabl 
if he gave them up; besid, he had late made a debt which gall 
extrem, and old featherston had almost bargain to pai it off. 
whole affair wa miser small: hi debt were small, even 
expect were not anyth so veri magnific. fred had known 
to whom he would have been asham of confess the small of 
scrape. such rumin natur produc a streak of 
bitter. to be born the son of a middlemarch manufactur, 
inevit heir to noth in particular, while such men as 
and vyan—certainli life wa a poor busi, when a spirit 
fellow, with a good appetit for the best of everyth, had so poor 
outlook.

it had not occur to fred that the introduct of bulstrod’s 
in the matter wa a fiction of old featherston’s; nor could thi 
made ani differ to hi posit. he saw plainli enough that the 
man want to exercis hi power by torment him a littl, and 
probabl to get some satisfact out of see him on unpleas 
with bulstrod. fred fanci that he saw to the bottom of hi 
featherston’s soul, though in realiti half what he saw there wa 
more than the reflex of hi own inclin. the difficult task 
know anoth soul is not for young gentlemen whose conscious 
chiefli made up of their own wish.

fred’s main point of debat with himself wa, whether he should 
hi father, or try to get through the affair without hi father’
knowledg. it wa probabl mr. waul who had been talk about him;
and if mari garth had repeat mr. waul’s report to rosamond, 
would be sure to reach hi father, who would as sure question 
about it. he said to rosamond, as thei slacken their pace—

“rosi, did mari tell you that mr. waul had said anyth about me?”

“ye, inde, she did.”

“what?”

“that you were veri unsteadi.”

“wa that all?”

“i should think that wa enough, fred.”

“you ar sure she said no more?”

“mari mention noth els. but realli, fred, i think you ought to 
asham.”

“oh, fudg! don’t lectur me. what did mari sai about it?”

“i am not oblig to tell you. you care so veri much what mari sai,
and you ar too rude to allow me to speak.”

“of cours i care what mari sai. she is the best girl i know.”

“i should never have thought she wa a girl to fall in love with.”

“how do you know what men would fall in love with? girl never know.”

“at least, fred, let me advis _you_ not to fall in love with her, 
she sai she would not marri you if you ask her.”

“she might have wait till i did ask her.”

“i knew it would nettl you, fred.”

“not at all. she would not have said so if you had not provok her.”
befor reach home, fred conclud that he would tell the 
affair as simpli as possibl to hi father, who might perhap take 
himself the unpleas busi of speak to bulstrod.




book ii.
old and young.




chapter xiii.

1_st gent_. how class your man?—as better than the most,
    or, seem better, wors beneath that cloak?
    as saint or knave, pilgrim or hypocrit?

2_d gent_. nai, tell me how you class your wealth of 
    the drift relic of all time.
    as well sort them at onc by size and liveri:
    vellum, tall copi, and the common 
    will hardli cover more 
    than all your label cunningli 
    to class your unread author.


in consequ of what he had heard from fred, mr. vinci determin 
speak with mr. bulstrod in hi privat room at the bank at half-
on, when he wa usual free from other caller. but a visitor 
come in at on o’clock, and mr. bulstrod had so much to sai to him,
that there wa littl chanc of the interview be over in half 
hour. the banker’s speech wa fluent, but it wa also copiou, and 
us up an appreci amount of time in brief medit paus. 
not imagin hi sickli aspect to have been of the yellow, black-
sort: he had a pale blond skin, thin grai-besprinkl brown hair,
light-grai ey, and a larg forehead. loud men call hi subdu 
an underton, and sometim impli that it wa inconsist 
open; though there seem to be no reason why a loud man should 
be given to conceal of anyth except hi own voic, unless it 
be shown that holi writ ha place the seat of candor in the lung. mr.
bulstrod had also a deferenti bend attitud in listen, and 
appar fix attent in hi ey which made those person 
thought themselv worth hear infer that he wa seek the 
improv from their discours. other, who expect to make no 
figur, dislik thi kind of moral lantern turn on them. if you 
not proud of your cellar, there is no thrill of satisfact in 
your guest hold up hi wine-glass to the light and look judici. 
joi ar reserv for consciou merit. henc mr. bulstrod’s 
attent wa not agreeabl to the publican and sinner 
middlemarch; it wa attribut by some to hi be a pharise, and 
other to hi be evangel. less superfici reason among 
wish to know who hi father and grandfath were, observ 
five-and-twenti year ago nobodi had ever heard of a bulstrod 
middlemarch. to hi present visitor, lydgat, the scrutin look 
a matter of indiffer: he simpli form an unfavor opinion 
the banker’s constitut, and conclud that he had an eager 
life with littl enjoy of tangibl thing.

“i shall be exceedingli oblig if you will look in on me 
occasion, mr. lydgat,” the banker observ, after a brief paus.
“if, as i dare to hope, i have the privileg of find you a 
coadjutor in the interest matter of hospit manag, there 
be mani question which we shall need to discuss in privat. as to 
new hospit, which is nearli finish, i shall consid what you 
said about the advantag of the special destin for fever. 
decis will rest with me, for though lord medlicot ha given 
land and timber for the build, he is not dispos to give 
person attent to the object.”

“there ar few thing better worth the pain in a provinci town 
thi,” said lydgat. “a fine fever hospit in addit to the 
infirmari might be the nucleu of a medic school here, when onc 
get our medic reform; and what would do more for medic 
than the spread of such school over the countri? a born provinci 
who ha a grain of public spirit as well as a few idea, should do 
he can to resist the rush of everyth that is a littl better 
common toward london. ani valid profession aim mai often find 
freer, if not a richer field, in the provinc.”

on of lydgat’s gift wa a voic habitu deep and sonor, 
capabl of becom veri low and gentl at the right moment. about 
ordinari bear there wa a certain fling, a fearless expect 
success, a confid in hi own power and integr much fortifi 
contempt for petti obstacl or seduct of which he had had 
experi. but thi proud open wa made lovabl by an 
of unaffect good-will. mr. bulstrod perhap like him the better 
the differ between them in pitch and manner; he certainli 
him the better, as rosamond did, for be a stranger in middlemarch.
on can begin so mani thing with a new person!—even begin to be 
better man.

“i shall rejoic to furnish your zeal with fuller opportun,” mr.
bulstrod answer; “i mean, by confid to you the superintend 
my new hospit, should a matur knowledg favor that issu, for i 
determin that so great an object shall not be shackl by our 
physician. inde, i am encourag to consid your advent to 
town as a graciou indic that a more manifest bless is now 
be award to my effort, which have hitherto been much withstood. 
regard to the old infirmari, we have gain the initi point—i 
your elect. and now i hope you will not shrink from incur 
certain amount of jealousi and dislik from your profession 
by present yourself as a reform.”

“i will not profess braveri,” said lydgat, smile, “but i 
a good deal of pleasur in fight, and i should not care for 
profess, if i did not believ that better method were to be 
and enforc there as well as everywher els.”

“the standard of that profess is low in middlemarch, my dear sir,”
said the banker. “i mean in knowledg and skill; not in social statu,
for our medic men ar most of them connect with 
townspeopl here. my own imperfect health ha induc me to give 
attent to those palli resourc which the divin merci 
place within our reach. i have consult emin men in 
metropoli, and i am painfulli awar of the backward under 
medic treatment labor in our provinci district.”

“ye;—with our present medic rule and educ, on must 
satisfi now and then to meet with a fair practition. as to all 
higher question which determin the start-point of a diagnosi—
to the philosophi of medic evid—ani glimmer of these can 
come from a scientif cultur of which countri practition 
usual no more notion than the man in the moon.”

mr. bulstrod, bend and look intent, found the form 
lydgat had given to hi agreement not quit suit to 
comprehens. under such circumst a judici man chang 
topic and enter on ground where hi own gift mai be more us.

“i am awar,” he said, “that the peculiar bia of medic abil 
toward materi mean. nevertheless, mr. lydgat, i hope we shall 
vari in sentiment as to a measur in which you ar not like to 
activ concern, but in which your sympathet concurr mai be 
aid to me. you recogn, i hope; the exist of spiritu 
in your patient?”

“certainli i do. but those word ar apt to cover differ mean 
differ mind.”

“precis. and on such subject wrong teach is as fatal as 
teach. now a point which i have much at heart to secur is a 
regul as to cleric attend at the old infirmari. the 
stand in mr. farebroth’s parish. you know mr. farebroth?”

“i have seen him. he gave me hi vote. i must call to thank him. 
seem a veri bright pleasant littl fellow. and i understand he is 
naturalist.”

“mr. farebroth, my dear sir, is a man deepli pain to contempl.
i suppos there is not a clergyman in thi countri who ha 
talent.” mr. bulstrod paus and look medit.

“i have not yet been pain by find ani excess talent 
middlemarch,” said lydgat, bluntli.

“what i desir,” mr. bulstrod continu, look still more seriou,
“is that mr. farebroth’s attend at the hospit should 
supersed by the appoint of a chaplain—of mr. tyke, in fact—
that no other spiritu aid should be call in.”

“as a medic man i could have no opinion on such a point unless i 
mr. tyke, and even then i should requir to know the case in which 
wa appli.” lydgat smile, but he wa bent on be circumspect.

“of cours you cannot enter fulli into the merit of thi measur 
present. but”—here mr. bulstrod began to speak with a more 
emphasi—“the subject is like to be refer to the medic board 
the infirmari, and what i trust i mai ask of you is, that in virtu 
the cooper between us which i now look forward to, you will not,
so far as you ar concern, be influenc by my oppon in 
matter.”

“i hope i shall have noth to do with cleric disput,” 
lydgat. “the path i have chosen is to work well in my own profess.”

“my respons, mr. lydgat, is of a broader kind. with me, inde,
thi question is on of sacr account; wherea with 
oppon, i have good reason to sai that it is an occas 
gratifi a spirit of worldli opposit. but i shall not 
drop on iota of my convict, or ceas to identifi myself with 
truth which an evil gener hate. i have devot myself to 
object of hospit-improv, but i will boldli confess to you, mr.
lydgat, that i should have no interest in hospit if i believ 
noth more wa concern therein than the cure of mortal diseas. 
have anoth ground of action, and in the face of persecut i 
not conceal it.”

mr. bulstrod’s voic had becom a loud and agit whisper as he 
the last word.

“there we certainli differ,” said lydgat. but he wa not sorri 
the door wa now open, and mr. vinci wa announc. that 
sociabl personag wa becom more interest to him sinc he had 
rosamond. not that, like her, he had been weav ani futur in 
their lot were unit; but a man natur rememb a charm 
with pleasur, and is will to dine where he mai see her again.
befor he took leav, mr. vinci had given that invit which he 
been “in no hurri about,” for rosamond at breakfast had mention 
she thought her uncl featherston had taken the new doctor into 
favor.

mr. bulstrod, alon with hi brother-in-law, pour himself out 
glass of water, and open a sandwich-box.

“i cannot persuad you to adopt my regimen, vinci?”

“no, no; i’ve no opinion of that system. life want pad,” said mr.
vinci, unabl to omit hi portabl theori. “howev,” he went on,
accent the word, as if to dismiss all irrelev, “what i came 
to talk about wa a littl affair of my young scapegrac, fred’s.”

“that is a subject on which you and i ar like to take quit 
differ view as on diet, vinci.”

“i hope not thi time.” (mr. vinci wa resolv to be good-humor.)
“the fact is, it’s about a whim of old featherston’s. somebodi 
been cook up a stori out of spite, and tell it to the old man, 
try to set him against fred. he’s veri fond of fred, and is like 
do someth handsom for him; inde he ha as good as told fred 
he mean to leav him hi land, and that make other peopl jealou.”

“vinci, i must repeat, that you will not get ani concurr from me 
to the cours you have pursu with your eldest son. it wa 
from worldli vaniti that you destin him for the church: with a 
of three son and four daughter, you were not warrant in 
monei to an expens educ which ha succeed in noth but 
give him extravag idl habit. you ar now reap 
consequ.”

to point out other peopl’s error wa a duti that mr. bulstrod 
shrank from, but mr. vinci wa not equal prepar to be patient. 
a man ha the immedi prospect of be mayor, and is readi, in 
interest of commerc, to take up a firm attitud on 
gener, he ha natur a sens of hi import to the 
of thing which seem to throw question of privat conduct into 
background. and thi particular reproof irrit him more than 
other. it wa emin superflu to him to be told that he 
reap the consequ. but he felt hi neck under bulstrod’s yoke;
and though he usual enjoi kick, he wa anxiou to refrain 
that relief.

“as to that, bulstrod, it’s no us go back. i’m not on of 
pattern men, and i don’t pretend to be. i couldn’t forese 
in the trade; there wasn’t a finer busi in middlemarch than our,
and the lad wa clever. my poor brother wa in the church, and 
have done well—had got prefer alreadi, but that stomach fever 
him off: els he might have been a dean by thi time. i think i 
justifi in what i tri to do for fred. if you come to religion, 
seem to me a man shouldn’t want to carv out hi meat to an 
beforehand:—on must trust a littl to provid and be gener. it’
a good british feel to try and rais your famili a littl: in 
opinion, it’s a father’s duti to give hi son a fine chanc.”

“i don’t wish to act otherwis than as your best friend, vinci, when 
sai that what you have been utter just now is on mass 
worldli and inconsist folli.”

“veri well,” said mr. vinci, kick in spite of resolut, “i 
profess to be anyth but worldli; and, what’s more, i don’t 
anybodi els who is not worldli. i suppos you don’t conduct 
on what you call unworldli principl. the onli differ i see 
that on worldli is a littl bit honest than anoth.”

“thi kind of discuss is unfruit, vinci,” said mr. bulstrod,
who, finish hi sandwich, had thrown himself back in hi chair, 
shade hi ey as if weari. “you had some more particular busi.”

“ye, ye. the long and short of it is, somebodi ha told 
featherston, give you as the author, that fred ha been 
or try to borrow monei on the prospect of hi land. of cours 
never said ani such nonsens. but the old fellow will insist on it 
fred should bring him a denial in your handwrit; that is, just a 
of a note sai you don’t believ a word of such stuff, either of 
have borrow or tri to borrow in such a fool’s wai. i suppos 
can have no object to do that.”

“pardon me. i have an object. i am by no mean sure that your son,
in hi reckless and ignor—i will us no sever word—ha 
tri to rais monei by hold out hi futur prospect, or even 
some on mai not have been foolish enough to suppli him on so vagu 
presumpt: there is plenti of such lax monei-lend as of 
folli in the world.”

“but fred give me hi honor that he ha never borrow monei on 
pretenc of ani understand about hi uncl’s land. he is not a liar.
i don’t want to make him better than he is. i have blown him 
well—nobodi can sai i wink at what he doe. but he is not a liar. and 
should have thought—but i mai be wrong—that there wa no religion 
hinder a man from believ the best of a young fellow, when you don’
know wors. it seem to me it would be a poor sort of religion to put 
spoke in hi wheel by refus to sai you don’t believ such harm 
him as you’ve got no good reason to believ.”

“i am not at all sure that i should be befriend your son 
smooth hi wai to the futur possess of featherston’s properti.
i cannot regard wealth as a bless to those who us it simpli as 
harvest for thi world. you do not like to hear these thing, vinci,
but on thi occas i feel call upon to tell you that i have 
motiv for further such a disposit of properti as that which 
refer to. i do not shrink from sai that it will not tend to 
son’s etern welfar or to the glori of god. why then should 
expect me to pen thi kind of affidavit, which ha no object but 
keep up a foolish partial and secur a foolish bequest?”

“if you mean to hinder everybodi from have monei but saint 
evangelist, you must give up some profit partnership, that’s 
i can sai,” mr. vinci burst out veri bluntli. “it mai be for the 
of god, but it is not for the glori of the middlemarch trade, 
plymdal’s hous us those blue and green dye it get from 
brass manufactori; thei rot the silk, that’s all i know about it.
perhap if other peopl knew so much of the profit went to the glori 
god, thei might like it better. but i don’t mind so much about that—
could get up a pretti row, if i chose.”

mr. bulstrod paus a littl befor he answer. “you pain me 
much by speak in thi wai, vinci. i do not expect you to 
my ground of action—it is not an easi thing even to thread a path 
principl in the intricaci of the world—still less to make 
thread clear for the careless and the scof. you must rememb, 
you pleas, that i stretch my toler toward you as my wife’
brother, and that it littl becom you to complain of me 
withhold materi help toward the worldli posit of your famili.
i must remind you that it is not your own prudenc or judgment that 
enabl you to keep your place in the trade.”

“veri like not; but you have been no loser by my trade yet,” said mr.
vinci, thoroughli nettl (a result which wa seldom much retard 
previou resolut). “and when you marri harriet, i don’t see 
you could expect that our famili should not hang by the same nail. 
you’ve chang your mind, and want my famili to come down in the world,
you’d better sai so. i’ve never chang; i’m a plain churchman now,
just as i us to be befor doctrin came up. i take the world as 
find it, in trade and everyth els. i’m content to be no 
than my neighbor. but if you want us to come down in the world, 
so. i shall know better what to do then.”

“you talk unreason. shall you come down in the world for want 
thi letter about your son?”

“well, whether or not, i consid it veri unhandsom of you to 
it. such do mai be line with religion, but outsid thei have 
nasti, dog-in-the-manger look. you might as well slander fred: it 
pretti near to it when you refus to sai you didn’t set a 
go. it’s thi sort of thing—thi tyrann spirit, want to 
bishop and banker everywher—it’s thi sort of thing make a man’s 
stink.”

“vinci, if you insist on quarrel with me, it will be 
pain to harriet as well as myself,” said mr. bulstrod, with 
trifl more eager and pale than usual.

“i don’t want to quarrel. it’s for my interest—and perhap for 
too—that we should be friend. i bear you no grudg; i think no 
of you than i do of other peopl. a man who half starv himself, 
goe the length in famili prayer, and so on, that you do, believ 
hi religion whatev it mai be: you could turn over your capit 
as fast with curs and swear:—plenti of fellow do. you like to 
master, there’s no deni that; you must be first chop in heaven, 
you won’t like it much. but you’re my sister’s husband, and we ought 
stick togeth; and if i know harriet, she’ll consid it your fault 
we quarrel becaus you strain at a gnat in thi wai, and refus to 
fred a good turn. and i don’t mean to sai i shall bear it well. 
consid it unhandsom.”

mr. vinci rose, began to button hi great-coat, and look steadili 
hi brother-in-law, mean to impli a demand for a decis answer.

thi wa not the first time that mr. bulstrod had begun by 
mr. vinci, and had end by see a veri unsatisfactori reflect 
himself in the coars unflatt mirror which that manufactur’
mind present to the subtler light and shadow of hi fellow-men; 
perhap hi experi ought to have warn him how the scene 
end. but a full-fed fountain will be gener with it water even 
the rain, when thei ar wors than useless; and a fine fount 
admonit is apt to be equal irrepress.

it wa not in mr. bulstrod’s natur to compli directli in 
of uncomfort suggest. befor chang hi cours, he 
need to shape hi motiv and bring them into accord with 
habitu standard. he said, at last—

“i will reflect a littl, vinci. i will mention the subject to harriet.
i shall probabl send you a letter.”

“veri well. as soon as you can, pleas. i hope it will all be 
befor i see you to-morrow.”




chapter xiv.

“follow here the strict 
for that sauc to dainti meat,
name idl, which mani 
by prefer, and call it sweet:
_first watch for morsel, like a 
mix well with buffet, stir them 
with good thick oil of flatteri, and froth with mean self-
li.
serv warm: the vessel you must 
to keep it in ar dead men’s shoe._”


mr. bulstrod’s consult of harriet seem to have had the 
desir by mr. vinci, for earli the next morn a letter came 
fred could carri to mr. featherston as the requir testimoni.

the old gentleman wa stai in bed on account of the cold weather,
and as mari garth wa not to be seen in the sit-room, fred 
up-stair immedi and present the letter to hi uncl, who,
prop up comfort on a bed-rest, wa not less abl than usual 
enjoi hi conscious of wisdom in distrust and 
mankind. he put on hi spectacl to read the letter, purs up 
lip and draw down their corner.

“_under the circumst i will not declin to state 
convict_—tchah! what fine word the fellow put! he’s as fine as 
auction—_that your son freder ha not obtain ani advanc 
monei on bequest promis by mr. featherston_—promis? who said 
had ever promis? i promis noth—i shall make codicil as long as 
like—_and that consid the natur of such a proceed, it 
unreason to presum that a young man of sens and charact 
attempt it_—ah, but the gentleman doesn’t sai you ar a young man 
sens and charact, mark you that, sir!—_as to my own concern with 
report of such a natur, i distinctli affirm that i never made 
statement to the effect that your son had borrow monei on 
properti that might accru to him on mr. featherston’s demis_—
my heart! ‘properti’—accru—demis! lawyer standish is noth to him.
he couldn’t speak finer if he want to borrow. well,” mr. 
here look over hi spectacl at fred, while he hand back 
letter to him with a contemptu gestur, “you don’t suppos i 
a thing becaus bulstrod write it out fine, eh?”

fred color. “you wish to have the letter, sir. i should think 
veri like that mr. bulstrod’s denial is as good as the 
which told you what he deni.”

“everi bit. i never said i believ either on or the other. and 
what d’ you expect?” said mr. featherston, curtli, keep on 
spectacl, but withdraw hi hand under hi wrap.

“i expect noth, sir.” fred with difficulti restrain himself 
vent hi irrit. “i came to bring you the letter. if you like 
will bid you good morn.”

“not yet, not yet. ring the bell; i want missi to come.”

it wa a servant who came in answer to the bell.

“tell missi to come!” said mr. featherston, impati. “
busi had she to go awai?” he spoke in the same tone when mari came.

“why couldn’t you sit still here till i told you to go? i want 
waistcoat now. i told you alwai to put it on the bed.”

mari’s ey look rather red, as if she had been cry. it wa 
that mr. featherston wa in on of hi most snappish humor 
morn, and though fred had now the prospect of receiv 
much-need present of monei, he would have prefer be free 
turn round on the old tyrant and tell him that mari garth wa too 
to be at hi beck. though fred had risen as she enter the room, 
had bare notic him, and look as if her nerv were quiver 
the expect that someth would be thrown at her. but she 
had anyth wors than word to dread. when she went to reach 
waistcoat from a peg, fred went up to her and said, “allow me.”

“let it alon! you bring it, missi, and lai it down here,” said mr.
featherston. “now you go awai again till i call you,” he ad, 
the waistcoat wa laid down by him. it wa usual with him to season 
pleasur in show favor to on person by be 
disagre to anoth, and mari wa alwai at hand to furnish 
condiment. when hi own rel came she wa treat better. 
he took out a bunch of kei from the waistcoat pocket, and slowli 
drew forth a tin box which wa under the bed-cloth.

“you expect i am go to give you a littl fortun, eh?” he said,
look abov hi spectacl and paus in the act of open the lid.

“not at all, sir. you were good enough to speak of make me a 
the other dai, els, of cours, i should not have thought of 
matter.” but fred wa of a hope disposit, and a vision 
present itself of a sum just larg enough to deliv him from 
certain anxieti. when fred got into debt, it alwai seem to 
highli probabl that someth or other—he did not necessarili 
what—would come to pass enabl him to pai in due time. and now 
the providenti occurr wa appar close at hand, it would 
been sheer absurd to think that the suppli would be short of 
need: as absurd as a faith that believ in half a miracl for want 
strength to believ in a whole on.

the deep-vein hand finger mani bank-note on after the other,
lai them down flat again, while fred lean back in hi chair,
scorn to look eager. he held himself to be a gentleman at heart, 
did not like court an old fellow for hi monei. at last, mr.
featherston ei him again over hi spectacl and present him 
a littl sheaf of note: fred could see distinctli that there were 
five, as the less signific edg gape toward him. but then, 
might mean fifti pound. he took them, sai—

“i am veri much oblig to you, sir,” and wa go to roll them 
without seem to think of their valu. but thi did not suit mr.
featherston, who wa ei him intent.

“come, don’t you think it worth your while to count ’em? you take 
like a lord; i suppos you lose it like on.”

“i thought i wa not to look a gift-hors in the mouth, sir. but 
shall be veri happi to count them.”

fred wa not so happi, howev, after he had count them. for 
actual present the absurd of be less than hi hope 
decid that thei must be. what can the fit of thing mean, if 
their fit to a man’s expect? fail thi, absurd 
atheism gape behind him. the collaps for fred wa sever when he 
that he held no more than five twenti, and hi share in the 
educ of thi countri did not seem to help him. nevertheless 
said, with rapid chang in hi fair complexion—

“it is veri handsom of you, sir.”

“i should think it is,” said mr. featherston, lock hi box 
replac it, then take off hi spectacl deliber, and 
length, as if hi inward medit had more deepli convinc him,
repeat, “i should think it handsom.”

“i assur you, sir, i am veri grate,” said fred, who had had time 
recov hi cheer air.

“so you ought to be. you want to cut a figur in the world, and 
reckon peter featherston is the onli on you’ve got to trust to.” 
the old man’s ey gleam with a curious mingl satisfact in 
conscious that thi smart young fellow reli upon him, and 
the smart young fellow wa rather a fool for do so.

“ye, inde: i wa not born to veri splendid chanc. few men 
been more cramp than i have been,” said fred, with some sens 
surpris at hi own virtu, consid how hardli he wa dealt with.
“it realli seem a littl too bad to have to ride a broken-
hunter, and see men, who, ar not half such good judg as yourself,
abl to throw awai ani amount of monei on bui bad bargain.”

“well, you can bui yourself a fine hunter now. eighti pound is 
for that, i reckon—and you’ll have twenti pound over to get 
out of ani littl scrape,” said mr. featherston, chuckl slightli.

“you ar veri good, sir,” said fred, with a fine sens of 
between the word and hi feel.

“ay, rather a better uncl than your fine uncl bulstrod. you won’
get much out of hi spekil, i think. he’s got a pretti 
string round your father’s leg, by what i hear, eh?”

“my father never tell me anyth about hi affair, sir.”

“well, he show some sens there. but other peopl find ’em out 
hi tell. _he’ll_ never have much to leav you: he’ll most-like 
without a will—he’s the sort of man to do it—let ’em make him mayor 
middlemarch as much as thei like. but you won’t get much by hi 
without a will, though you _ar_ the eldest son.”

fred thought that mr. featherston had never been so 
befor. true, he had never befor given him quit so much monei 
onc.

“shall i destroi thi letter of mr. bulstrod’s, sir?” said fred,
rise with the letter as if he would put it in the fire.

“ay, ay, i don’t want it. it’s worth no monei to me.”

fred carri the letter to the fire, and thrust the poker through 
with much zest. he long to get out of the room, but he wa a 
asham befor hi inner self, as well as befor hi uncl, to run 
immedi after pocket the monei. present, the farm-bailiff 
up to give hi master a report, and fred, to hi unspeak relief,
wa dismiss with the injunct to come again soon.

he had long not onli to be set free from hi uncl, but also to 
mari garth. she wa now in her usual place by the fire, with sew 
her hand and a book open on the littl tabl by her side. her 
had lost some of their red now, and she had her usual air 
self-command.

“am i want up-stair?” she said, half rise as fred enter.

“no; i am onli dismiss, becaus simmon is gone up.”

mari sat down again, and resum her work. she wa certainli 
him with more indiffer than usual: she did not know 
affection indign he had felt on her behalf up-stair.

“mai i stai here a littl, mari, or shall i bore you?”

“prai sit down,” said mari; “you will not be so heavi a bore as mr.
john waul, who wa here yesterdai, and he sat down without ask 
leav.”

“poor fellow! i think he is in love with you.”

“i am not awar of it. and to me it is on of the most odiou thing 
a girl’s life, that there must alwai be some supposit of fall 
love come between her and ani man who is kind to her, and to whom 
is grate. i should have thought that i, at least, might have 
safe from all that. i have no ground for the nonsens vaniti 
fanci everybodi who come near me is in love with me.”

mari did not mean to betrai ani feel, but in spite of herself 
end in a tremul tone of vexat.

“confound john waul! i did not mean to make you angri. i didn’t 
you had ani reason for be grate to me. i forgot what a 
servic you think it if ani on snuff a candl for you.” fred also 
hi pride, and wa not go to show that he knew what had call 
thi outburst of mari’s.

“oh, i am not angri, except with the wai of the world. i do like to 
spoken to as if i had common-sens. i realli often feel as if i 
understand a littl more than i ever hear even from young gentlemen 
have been to colleg.” mari had recov, and she spoke with 
suppress rippl under-current of laughter pleasant to hear.

“i don’t care how merri you ar at my expens thi morn,” said fred,
“i thought you look so sad when you came up-stair. it is a shame 
should stai here to be bulli in that wai.”

“oh, i have an easi life—by comparison. i have tri be a teacher,
and i am not fit for that: my mind is too fond of wander on it 
wai. i think ani hardship is better than pretend to do what on 
paid for, and never realli do it. everyth here i can do as 
as ani on els could; perhap better than some—rosi, for exampl.
though she is just the sort of beauti creatur that is 
with ogr in fairi tale.”

“_rosi!_” cri fred, in a tone of profound brotherli sceptic.

“come, fred!” said mari, emphat; “you have no right to be 
critic.”

“do you mean anyth particular—just now?”

“no, i mean someth gener—alwai.”

“oh, that i am idl and extravag. well, i am not fit to be a 
man. i should not have made a bad fellow if i had been rich.”

“you would have done your duti in that state of life to which it 
not pleas god to call you,” said mari, laugh.

“well, i couldn’t do my duti as a clergyman, ani more than you could 
your as a gover. you ought to have a littl fellow-feel there,
mari.”

“i never said you ought to be a clergyman. there ar other sort 
work. it seem to me veri miser not to resolv on some cours 
act accordingli.”

“so i could, if—” fred broke off, and stood up, lean against 
mantel-piec.

“if you were sure you should not have a fortun?”

“i did not sai that. you want to quarrel with me. it is too bad of 
to be guid by what other peopl sai about me.”

“how can i want to quarrel with you? i should be quarrel with 
my new book,” said mari, lift the volum on the tabl. “
naughti you mai be to other peopl, you ar good to me.”

“becaus i like you better than ani on els. but i know you 
me.”

“ye, i do—a littl,” said mari, nod, with a smile.

“you would admir a stupend fellow, who would have wise 
about everyth.”

“ye, i should.” mari wa sew swiftli, and seem 
mistress of the situat. when a convers ha taken a wrong 
for us, we onli get farther and farther into the swamp of awkward.
thi wa what fred vinci felt.

“i suppos a woman is never in love with ani on she ha 
known—ever sinc she can rememb; as a man often is. it is alwai 
new fellow who strike a girl.”

“let me see,” said mari, the corner of her mouth curl archli; “
must go back on my experi. there is juliet—she seem an exampl 
what you sai. but then ophelia had probabl known hamlet a long while;
and brenda troil—she had known mordaunt merton ever sinc thei 
children; but then he seem to have been an estim young man; 
minna wa still more deepli in love with cleveland, who wa a stranger.
waverlei wa new to flora macivor; but then she did not fall in 
with him. and there ar olivia and sophia primros, and corinn—
mai be said to have fallen in love with new men. altogeth, 
experi is rather mix.”

mari look up with some roguish at fred, and that look of her 
veri dear to him, though the ey were noth more than clear 
where observ sat laughingli. he wa certainli an 
fellow, and as he had grown from boi to man, he had grown in love 
hi old playmat, notwithstand that share in the higher educ 
the countri which had exalt hi view of rank and incom.

“when a man is not love, it is no us for him to sai that he could 
a better fellow—could do anyth—i mean, if he were sure of 
love in return.”

“not of the least us in the world for him to sai he _could_ be better.
might, could, would—thei ar contempt auxiliari.”

“i don’t see how a man is to be good for much unless he ha some 
woman to love him dearli.”

“i think the good should come befor he expect that.”

“you know better, mari. women don’t love men for their good.”

“perhap not. but if thei love them, thei never think them bad.”

“it is hardli fair to sai i am bad.”

“i said noth at all about you.”

“i never shall be good for anyth, mari, if you will not sai that 
love me—if you will not promis to marri me—i mean, when i am abl 
marri.”

“if i did love you, i would not marri you: i would certainli 
promis ever to marri you.”

“i think that is quit wick, mari. if you love me, you ought 
promis to marri me.”

“on the contrari, i think it would be wick in me to marri you even 
i did love you.”

“you mean, just as i am, without ani mean of maintain a wife. 
cours: i am but three-and-twenti.”

“in that last point you will alter. but i am not so sure of ani 
alter. my father sai an idl man ought not to exist, much less,
be marri.”

“then i am to blow my brain out?”

“no; on the whole i should think you would do better to pass 
examin. i have heard mr. farebroth sai it is 
easi.”

“that is all veri fine. anyth is easi to him. not that 
ha anyth to do with it. i am ten time clever than mani men 
pass.”

“dear me!” said mari, unabl to repress her sarcasm; “that account 
the curat like mr. crows. divid your clever by ten, and 
quotient—dear me!—is abl to take a degre. but that onli show you 
ten time more idl than the other.”

“well, if i did pass, you would not want me to go into the church?”

“that is not the question—what i want you to do. you have a 
of your own, i suppos. there! there is mr. lydgat. i must go and 
my uncl.”

“mari,” said fred, seiz her hand as she rose; “if you will not 
me some encourag, i shall get wors instead of better.”

“i will not give you ani encourag,” said mari, redden. “
friend would dislik it, and so would mine. my father would think it 
disgrac to me if i accept a man who got into debt, and would 
work!”

fred wa stung, and releas her hand. she walk to the door, 
there she turn and said: “fred, you have alwai been so good, 
gener to me. i am not ungrat. but never speak to me in that 
again.”

“veri well,” said fred, sulkili, take up hi hat and whip. 
complexion show patch of pale pink and dead white. like mani 
pluck idl young gentleman, he wa thoroughli in love, and with 
plain girl, who had no monei! but have mr. featherston’s land in 
background, and a persuas that, let mari sai what she would, 
realli did care for him, fred wa not utterli in despair.

when he got home, he gave four of the twenti to hi mother, 
her to keep them for him. “i don’t want to spend that monei, mother. 
want it to pai a debt with. so keep it safe awai from my finger.”

“bless you, my dear,” said mr. vinci. she dote on her eldest son 
her youngest girl (a child of six), whom other thought her 
naughtiest children. the mother’s ey ar not alwai deceiv in 
partial: she at least can best judg who is the tender,
filial-heart child. and fred wa certainli veri fond of hi mother.
perhap it wa hi fond for anoth person also that made 
particularli anxiou to take some secur against hi own liabil 
spend the hundr pound. for the creditor to whom he ow a 
and sixti held a firmer secur in the shape of a bill sign 
mari’s father.




chapter xv.

“black ey you have left, you sai,
    blue ey fail to draw you;
yet you seem more rapt to-dai,
    than of old we saw you.

“oh, i track the fairest 
    through new haunt of pleasur;
footprint here and echo 
    guid me to my treasur:

“lo! she turn—immort 
    wrought to mortal statur,
fresh as starlight’s ag truth—
    mani-namèd natur!”


a great historian, as he insist on call himself, who had 
happi to be dead a hundr and twenti year ago, and so to take 
place among the colossi whose huge leg our live petti 
observ to walk under, glori in hi copiou remark and 
as the least imit part of hi work, and especi in those 
chapter to the success book of hi histori, where he seem 
bring hi armchair to the proscenium and chat with us in all the 
eas of hi fine english. but field live when the dai were 
(for time, like monei, is measur by our need), when 
afternoon were spaciou, and the clock tick slowli in the 
even. we belat historian must not linger after hi exampl; 
if we did so, it is probabl that our chat would be thin and eager, 
if deliv from a campstool in a parrot-hous. i at least have 
much to do in unravel certain human lot, and see how thei 
woven and interwoven, that all the light i can command must 
concentr on thi particular web, and not dispers over 
tempt rang of relev call the univers.

at present i have to make the new settler lydgat better known to 
on interest in him than he could possibl be even to those who 
seen the most of him sinc hi arriv in middlemarch. for sure 
must admit that a man mai be puf and belaud, envi, ridicul,
count upon as a tool and fallen in love with, or at least select 
a futur husband, and yet remain virtual unknown—known mere as 
cluster of sign for hi neighbor’ fals supposit. there wa 
gener impress, howev, that lydgat wa not altogeth a 
countri doctor, and in middlemarch at that time such an impress 
signific of great thing be expect from him. for everybodi’
famili doctor wa remark clever, and wa understood to 
immeasur skill in the manag and train of the most 
or viciou diseas. the evid of hi clever wa of the 
intuit order, ly in hi ladi-patient’ immov convict, 
wa unassail by ani object except that their intuit 
oppos by other equal strong; each ladi who saw medic truth 
wrench and “the strengthen treatment” regard toller and “
lower system” as medic perdit. for the heroic time of 
bleed and blister had not yet depart, still less the time 
thorough-go theori, when diseas in gener wa call by some 
name, and treat accordingli without shilli-shalli—as if, for exampl,
it were to be call insurrect, which must not be fire on 
blank-cartridg, but have it blood drawn at onc. the 
and the lower were all “clever” men in somebodi’s opinion, which 
realli as much as can be said for ani live talent. nobodi’
imagin had gone so far as to conjectur that mr. lydgat 
know as much as dr. spragu and dr. minchin, the two physician, 
alon could offer ani hope when danger wa extrem, and when 
smallest hope wa worth a guinea. still, i repeat, there wa a 
impress that lydgat wa someth rather more uncommon than 
gener practition in middlemarch. and thi wa true. he wa 
seven-and-twenti, an ag at which mani men ar not quit common—
which thei ar hope of achiev, resolut in avoid, 
that mammon shall never put a bit in their mouth and get astrid 
back, but rather that mammon, if thei have anyth to do with him,
shall draw their chariot.

he had been left an orphan when he wa fresh from a public school. 
father, a militari man, had made but littl provis for 
children, and when the boi tertiu ask to have a medic educ,
it seem easier to hi guardian to grant hi request by 
him to a countri practition than to make ani object on the 
of famili digniti. he wa on of the rarer lad who earli get a 
bent and make up their mind that there is someth particular in 
which thei would like to do for it own sake, and not becaus 
father did it. most of us who turn to ani subject with love 
some morn or even hour when we got on a high stool to reach 
an untri volum, or sat with part lip listen to a new talker,
or for veri lack of book began to listen to the voic within, as 
first traceabl begin of our love. someth of that sort 
to lydgat. he wa a quick fellow, and when hot from plai, would 
himself in a corner, and in five minut be deep in ani sort of 
that he could lai hi hand on: if it were rassela or gulliv, 
much the better, but bailei’s dictionari would do, or the bibl 
the apocrypha in it. someth he must read, when he wa not ride 
poni, or run and hunt, or listen to the talk of men. all 
wa true of him at ten year of ag; he had then read through “chrysal,
or the adventur of a guinea,” which wa neither milk for babe, 
ani chalki mixtur meant to pass for milk, and it had alreadi 
to him that book were stuff, and that life wa stupid. hi 
studi had not much modifi that opinion, for though he “did” 
classic and mathemat, he wa not pre-emin in them. it wa 
of him, that lydgat could do anyth he like, but he had 
not yet like to do anyth remark. he wa a vigor anim 
a readi understand, but no spark had yet kindl in him 
intellectu passion; knowledg seem to him a veri 
affair, easili master: judg from the convers of hi elder,
he had appar got alreadi more than wa necessari for matur life.
probabl thi wa not an except result of expens teach 
that period of short-waist coat, and other fashion which have 
yet recur. but, on vacat, a wet dai sent him to the small 
librari to hunt onc more for a book which might have some 
for him: in vain! unless, inde, he took down a dusti row of 
with grai-paper back and dingi label—the volum of an 
cyclopaedia which he had never disturb. it would at least be 
novelti to disturb them. thei were on the highest shelf, and he 
on a chair to get them down. but he open the volum which he 
took from the shelf: somehow, on is apt to read in a 
attitud, just where it might seem inconveni to do so. the page 
open on wa under the head of anatomi, and the first passag 
drew hi ey wa on the valv of the heart. he wa not 
acquaint with valv of ani sort, but he knew that valva 
fold-door, and through thi crevic came a sudden light 
him with hi first vivid notion of fine adjust mechan in 
human frame. a liber educ had of cours left him free to 
the indec passag in the school classic, but beyond a 
sens of secreci and obscen in connect with hi 
structur, had left hi imagin quit unbiass, so that 
anyth he knew hi brain lai in small bag at hi templ, and 
had no more thought of repres to himself how hi blood 
than how paper serv instead of gold. but the moment of vocat 
come, and befor he got down from hi chair, the world wa made new 
him by a presenti of endless process fill the vast 
plank out of hi sight by that wordi ignor which he had 
to be knowledg. from that hour lydgat felt the growth of 
intellectu passion.

we ar not afraid of tell over and over again how a man come 
fall in love with a woman and be wed to her, or els be 
part from her. is it due to excess of poetri or of stupid that 
ar never weari of describ what king jame call a woman’s “
and her fairness,” never weari of listen to the twang of the 
troubadour string, and ar compar uninterest in that 
kind of “makdom and fairness” which must be woo with 
thought and patient renunci of small desir? in the stori of 
passion, too, the develop vari: sometim it is the 
marriag, sometim frustrat and final part. and not seldom 
catastroph is bound up with the other passion, sung by 
troubadour. for in the multitud of middl-ag men who go about 
vocat in a daili cours determin for them much in the same wai 
the tie of their cravat, there is alwai a good number who onc 
to shape their own deed and alter the world a littl. the stori 
their come to be shapen after the averag and fit to be pack by 
gross, is hardli ever told even in their conscious; for 
their ardor in gener unpaid toil cool as impercept as 
ardor of other youth love, till on dai their earlier self 
like a ghost in it old home and made the new furnitur ghastli.
noth in the world more subtl than the process of their 
chang! in the begin thei inhal it unknowingli: you and i 
have sent some of our breath toward infect them, when we 
our conform falsiti or drew our silli conclus: or perhap 
came with the vibrat from a woman’s glanc.

lydgat did not mean to be on of those failur, and there wa 
better hope of him becaus hi scientif interest soon took the 
of a profession enthusiasm: he had a youth belief in 
bread-win work, not to be stifl by that initi in 
call hi ’prentic dai; and he carri to hi studi in london,
edinburgh, and pari, the convict that the medic profess as 
might be wa the finest in the world; present the most 
interchang between scienc and art; offer the most direct 
between intellectu conquest and the social good. lydgat’s 
demand thi combin: he wa an emot creatur, with 
flesh-and-blood sens of fellowship which withstood all 
abstract of special studi. he care not onli for “case,” but 
john and elizabeth, especi elizabeth.

there wa anoth attract in hi profess: it want reform, 
gave a man an opportun for some indign resolv to reject 
venal decor and other humbug, and to be the possessor of 
though undemand qualif. he went to studi in pari with 
determin that when he came home again he would settl in 
provinci town as a gener practition, and resist the 
sever between medic and surgic knowledg in the interest of 
own scientif pursuit, as well as of the gener advanc: he 
keep awai from the rang of london intrigu, jealousi, and 
truckl, and win celebr, howev slowli, as jenner had done, 
the independ valu of hi work. for it must be rememb that 
wa a dark period; and in spite of vener colleg which us 
effort to secur puriti of knowledg by make it scarc, and 
exclud error by a rigid exclus in relat to fee 
appoint, it happen that veri ignor young gentlemen 
promot in town, and mani more got a legal right to practis 
larg area in the countri. also, the high standard held up to 
public mind by the colleg of physician, which gave it 
sanction to the expens and highli rarefi medic 
obtain by graduat of oxford and cambridg, did not hinder 
from have an excel time of it; for sinc profession 
chiefli consist in give a great mani drug, the public 
that it might be better off with more drug still, if thei could 
be got cheapli, and henc swallow larg cubic measur of 
prescrib by unscrupul ignor which had taken no degre.
consid that statist had not yet embrac a calcul as 
the number of ignor or cant doctor which absolut must 
in the teeth of all chang, it seem to lydgat that a chang in 
unit wa the most direct mode of chang the number. he meant to 
a unit who would make a certain amount of differ toward 
spread chang which would on dai tell appreci upon 
averag, and in the mean time have the pleasur of make 
advantag differ to the viscera of hi own patient. but he 
not simpli aim at a more genuin kind of practic than wa common. 
wa ambiti of a wider effect: he wa fire with the possibl 
he might work out the proof of an anatom concept and make a 
in the chain of discoveri.

doe it seem incongru to you that a middlemarch surgeon should 
of himself as a discover? most of us, inde, know littl of 
great origin until thei have been lift up among 
constel and alreadi rule our fate. but that herschel, 
exampl, who “broke the barrier of the heaven”—did he not onc plai 
provinci church-organ, and give music-lesson to stumbl pianist?
each of those shine on had to walk on the earth among neighbor 
perhap thought much more of hi gait and hi garment than of 
which wa to give him a titl to everlast fame: each of them had 
littl local person histori sprinkl with small temptat 
sordid care, which made the retard friction of hi cours 
final companionship with the immort. lydgat wa not blind to 
danger of such friction, but he had plenti of confid in 
resolut to avoid it as far as possibl: be seven-and-twenti, 
felt himself experienc. and he wa not go to have hi 
provok by contact with the showi worldli success of the capit,
but to live among peopl who could hold no rivalri with that pursuit 
a great idea which wa to be a twin object with the assidu 
of hi profess. there wa fascin in the hope that the 
purpos would illumin each other: the care observ 
infer which wa hi daili work, the us of the len to further 
judgment in special case, would further hi thought as an 
of larger inquiri. wa not thi the typic pre-emin of 
profess? he would be a good middlemarch doctor, and by that 
mean keep himself in the track of far-reach investig. on 
point he mai fairli claim approv at thi particular stage of 
career: he did not mean to imit those philanthrop model who 
a profit out of poison pickl to support themselv while thei 
expos adulter, or hold share in a gambl-hell that thei 
have leisur to repres the caus of public moral. he intend 
begin in hi own case some particular reform which were 
certainli within hi reach, and much less of a problem than 
demonstr of an anatom concept. on of these reform wa 
act stoutli on the strength of a recent legal decis, and 
prescrib, without dispens drug or take percentag 
druggist. thi wa an innov for on who had chosen to adopt 
style of gener practition in a countri town, and would be felt 
offens critic by hi profession brethren. but lydgat meant 
innov in hi treatment also, and he wa wise enough to see that 
best secur for hi practis honestli accord to hi belief 
to get rid of systemat temptat to the contrari.

perhap that wa a more cheer time for observ and theoriz 
the present; we ar apt to think it the finest era of the world 
america wa begin to be discov, when a bold sailor, even if 
were wreck, might alight on a new kingdom; and about 1829 the 
territori of patholog were a fine america for a spirit 
adventur. lydgat wa ambiti abov all to contribut 
enlarg the scientif, ration basi of hi profess. the more 
becam interest in special question of diseas, such as the 
of fever or fever, the more keenli he felt the need for 
fundament knowledg of structur which just at the begin of 
centuri had been illumin by the brief and gloriou career 
bichat, who di when he wa onli on-and-thirti, but, like 
alexand, left a realm larg enough for mani heir. that 
frenchman first carri out the concept that live bodi,
fundament consid, ar not associ of organ which can 
understood by studi them first apart, and then as it were feder;
but must be regard as consist of certain primari web or tissu,
out of which the variou organ—brain, heart, lung, and so on—
compact, as the variou accommod of a hous ar built up 
variou proport of wood, iron, stone, brick, zinc, and the rest,
each materi have it peculiar composit and proport. no man,
on see, can understand and estim the entir structur or 
part—what ar it frailti and what it repair, without know 
natur of the materi. and the concept wrought out by bichat, 
hi detail studi of the differ tissu, act necessarili 
medic question as the turn of ga-light would act on a dim,
oil-lit street, show new connect and hitherto hidden fact 
structur which must be taken into account in consid the 
of maladi and the action of medica. but result which depend 
human conscienc and intellig work slowli, and now at the end 
1829, most medic practic wa still strut or shambl along 
old path, and there wa still scientif work to be done which 
have seem to be a direct sequenc of bichat’s. thi great seer 
not go beyond the consider of the tissu as ultim fact in 
live organ, mark the limit of anatom analysi; but it 
open to anoth mind to sai, have not these structur some 
basi from which thei have all start, as your sarsnet, gauz, net,
satin, and velvet from the raw cocoon? here would be anoth light, 
of oxi-hydrogen, show the veri grain of thing, and revis 
former explan. of thi sequenc to bichat’s work, 
vibrat along mani current of the european mind, lydgat 
enamour; he long to demonstr the more intim relat 
live structur, and help to defin men’s thought more 
after the true order. the work had not yet been done, but onli 
for those who knew how to us the prepar. what wa the 
tissu? in that wai lydgat put the question—not quit in the 
requir by the await answer; but such miss of the right 
befal mani seeker. and he count on quiet interv to 
watchfulli seiz, for take up the thread of investig—on 
hint to be won from dilig applic, not onli of the scalpel, 
of the microscop, which research had begun to us again with 
enthusiasm of relianc. such wa lydgat’s plan of hi futur: to 
good small work for middlemarch, and great work for the world.

he wa certainli a happi fellow at thi time: to be seven-and-twenti,
without ani fix vice, with a gener resolut that hi 
should be benefic, and with idea in hi brain that made 
interest quit apart from the cultu of horseflesh and other 
rite of costli observ, which the eight hundr pound left 
after bui hi practic would certainli not have gone far in 
for. he wa at a start-point which make mani a man’s career a 
subject for bet, if there were ani gentlemen given to 
amus who could appreci the complic probabl of 
arduou purpos, with all the possibl thwart and further 
circumst, all the niceti of inward balanc, by which a man 
and make hi point or els is carri headlong. the risk would 
even with close knowledg of lydgat’s charact; for charact too 
a process and an unfold. the man wa still in the make, as much 
the middlemarch doctor and immort discover, and there were 
virtu and fault capabl of shrink or expand. the fault 
not, i hope, be a reason for the withdraw of your interest in him.
among our valu friend is there not some on or other who is a 
too self-confid and disdain; whose distinguish mind is a 
spot with common; who is a littl pinch here and 
there with nativ prejudic; or whose better energi ar liabl 
laps down the wrong channel under the influenc of 
solicit? all these thing might be alleg against lydgat, 
then, thei ar the periphras of a polit preacher, who talk of adam,
and would not like to mention anyth pain to the pew-renter. 
particular fault from which these delic gener ar 
have distinguish physiognomi, diction, accent, and grimac;
fill up part in veri variou drama. our vaniti differ as 
nose do: all conceit is not the same conceit, but vari 
correspond with the minutia of mental make in which on of 
differ from anoth. lydgat’s conceit wa of the arrog sort, 
simper, never impertin, but massiv in it claim 
benevol contemptu. he would do a great deal for noodl, 
sorri for them, and feel quit sure that thei could have no 
over him: he had thought of join the saint simonian when he wa 
pari, in order to turn them against some of their own doctrin. 
hi fault were mark by kindr trait, and were those of a man 
had a fine bariton, whose cloth hung well upon him, and who even 
hi ordinari gestur had an air of inbr distinct. where then 
the spot of common? sai a young ladi enamour of that 
grace. how could there be ani common in a man so well-bred, 
ambiti of social distinct, so gener and unusu in hi 
of social duti? as easili as there mai be stupid in a man of 
if you take him unawar on the wrong subject, or as mani a man who 
the best will to advanc the social millennium might be ill-inspir 
imagin it lighter pleasur; unabl to go beyond offenbach’s music,
or the brilliant pun in the last burlesqu. lydgat’s spot 
common lai in the complexion of hi prejudic, which, in spite 
nobl intent and sympathi, were half of them such as ar found 
ordinari men of the world: that distinct of mind which belong 
hi intellectu ardor, did not penetr hi feel and 
about furnitur, or women, or the desir of it be 
(without hi tell) that he wa better born than other 
surgeon. he did not mean to think of furnitur at present; 
whenev he did so it wa to be fear that neither biologi nor 
of reform would lift him abov the vulgar of feel that 
would be an incompat in hi furnitur not be of the best.

as to women, he had onc alreadi been drawn headlong by 
folli, which he meant to be final, sinc marriag at some 
period would of cours not be impetu. for those who want to 
acquaint with lydgat it will be good to know what wa that case 
impetu folli, for it mai stand as an exampl of the fit 
of passion to which he wa prone, togeth with the chivalr 
which help to make him moral lovabl. the stori can be told 
mani word. it happen when he wa studi in pari, and just at 
time when, over and abov hi other work, he wa occupi with 
galvan experi. on even, tire with hi experi, 
not be abl to elicit the fact he need, he left hi frog 
rabbit to some repos under their try and mysteri 
of unexplain shock, and went to finish hi even at the theatr 
the port saint martin, where there wa a melodrama which he 
alreadi seen sever time; attract, not by the ingeni work of 
collabor author, but by an actress whose part it wa to stab 
lover, mistak him for the evil-design duke of the piec. 
wa in love with thi actress, as a man is in love with a woman whom 
never expect to speak to. she wa a provencal, with dark ey, 
greek profil, and round majest form, have that sort of 
which carri a sweet matronli even in youth, and her voic wa 
soft coo. she had but late come to pari, and bore a 
reput, her husband act with her as the unfortun lover. 
wa her act which wa “no better than it should be,” but the 
wa satisfi. lydgat’s onli relax now wa to go and look at 
woman, just as he might have thrown himself under the breath of 
sweet south on a bank of violet for a while, without prejudic to 
galvan, to which he would present return. but thi even the 
drama had a new catastroph. at the moment when the heroin wa to 
the stab of her lover, and he wa to fall gracefulli, the 
verit stab her husband, who fell as death will. a wild 
pierc the hous, and the provencal fell swoon: a shriek and 
swoon were demand by the plai, but the swoon too wa real 
time. lydgat leap and climb, he hardli knew how, on to the stage,
and wa activ in help, make the acquaint of hi heroin 
find a contus on her head and lift her gentli in hi arm.
pari rang with the stori of thi death:—wa it a murder? some of 
actress’s warmest admir were inclin to believ in her guilt, 
like her the better for it (such wa the tast of those time); 
lydgat wa not on of these. he vehement contend for 
innoc, and the remot imperson passion for her beauti which 
had felt befor, had pass now into person devot, and 
thought of her lot. the notion of murder wa absurd: no motiv 
discover, the young coupl be understood to dote on each other;
and it wa not unpreced that an accident slip of the foot 
have brought these grave consequ. the legal investig end 
madam laur’s releas. lydgat by thi time had had mani 
with her, and found her more and more ador. she talk littl; 
that wa an addit charm. she wa melancholi, and seem grate;
her presenc wa enough, like that of the even light. lydgat 
madli anxiou about her affect, and jealou lest ani other man 
himself should win it and ask her to marri him. but instead 
reopen her engag at the port saint martin, where she 
have been all the more popular for the fatal episod, she left 
without warn, forsak her littl court of admir. perhap no 
carri inquiri far except lydgat, who felt that all scienc had 
to a stand-still while he imagin the unhappi laur, stricken 
ever-wander sorrow, herself wander, and find no 
comfort. hidden actress, howev, ar not so difficult to find 
some other hidden fact, and it wa not long befor lydgat 
indic that laur had taken the rout to lyon. he found her 
last act with great success at avignon under the same name, 
more majest than ever as a forsaken wife carri her child in 
arm. he spoke to her after the plai, wa receiv with the 
quietud which seem to him beauti as clear depth of water, 
obtain leav to visit her the next dai; when he wa bent on 
her that he ador her, and on ask her to marri him. he knew 
thi wa like the sudden impuls of a madman—incongru even with 
habitu foibl. no matter! it wa the on thing which he wa 
to do. he had two selv within him appar, and thei must learn 
accommod each other and bear reciproc impedi. strang, 
some of us, with quick altern vision, see beyond our infatu,
and even while we rave on the height, behold the wide plain where 
persist self paus and await us.

to have approach laur with ani suit that wa not 
tender would have been simpli a contradict of hi whole 
toward her.

“you have come all the wai from pari to find me?” she said to him 
next dai, sit befor him with fold arm, and look at him 
ey that seem to wonder as an untam rumin anim wonder.
“ar all englishmen like that?”

“i came becaus i could not live without try to see you. you 
lone; i love you; i want you to consent to be my wife; i will wait,
but i want you to promis that you will marri me—no on els.”

laur look at him in silenc with a melancholi radianc from 
her grand eyelid, until he wa full of raptur certainti, and 
close to her knee.

“i will tell you someth,” she said, in her coo wai, keep 
arm fold. “my foot realli slip.”

“i know, i know,” said lydgat, deprecatingli. “it wa a 
accid—a dread stroke of calam that bound me to you the more.”

again laur paus a littl and then said, slowli, “_i meant to 
it._”

lydgat, strong man as he wa, turn pale and trembl: moment 
to pass befor he rose and stood at a distanc from her.

“there wa a secret, then,” he said at last, even vehement. “he 
brutal to you: you hate him.”

“no! he weari me; he wa too fond: he would live in pari, and not 
my countri; that wa not agreeabl to me.”

“great god!” said lydgat, in a groan of horror. “and you plan 
murder him?”

“i did not plan: it came to me in the plai—_i meant to do it._”

lydgat stood mute, and unconsci press hi hat on while 
look at her. he saw thi woman—the first to whom he had given 
young ador—amid the throng of stupid crimin.

“you ar a good young man,” she said. “but i do not like husband. 
will never have anoth.”

three dai afterward lydgat wa at hi galvan again in hi 
chamber, believ that illus were at an end for him. he wa 
from harden effect by the abund kind of hi heart and 
belief that human life might be made better. but he had more 
than ever for trust hi judgment, now that it wa so experienc;
and henceforth he would take a strictli scientif view of woman,
entertain no expect but such as were justifi beforehand.

no on in middlemarch wa like to have such a notion of lydgat’
past as ha here been faintli shadow, and inde the 
townsfolk there were not more given than mortal gener to ani 
attempt at exact in the represent to themselv of what 
not come under their own sens. not onli young virgin of that town,
but grai-beard men also, were often in hast to conjectur how a 
acquaint might be wrought into their purpos, content with 
vagu knowledg as to the wai in which life had been shape him 
that instrument. middlemarch, in fact, count on 
lydgat and assimil him veri comfort.




chapter xvi.

“all that in woman is 
    in thy fair self i find—
for the whole sex can but 
    the handsom and the kind.”
—sir charl sedlei.


the question whether mr. tyke should be appoint as salari 
to the hospit wa an excit topic to the middlemarch; 
lydgat heard it discuss in a wai that threw much light on the 
exercis in the town by mr. bulstrod. the banker wa evid 
ruler, but there wa an opposit parti, and even among hi 
there were some who allow it to be seen that their support wa 
compromis, and who frankli state their impress that the 
scheme of thing, and especi the casualti of trade, requir 
to hold a candl to the devil.

mr. bulstrod’s power wa not due simpli to hi be a countri banker,
who knew the financi secret of most trader in the town and 
touch the spring of their credit; it wa fortifi by a 
that wa at onc readi and sever—readi to confer oblig, 
sever in watch the result. he had gather, as an industri 
alwai at hi post, a chief share in administ the town chariti,
and hi privat chariti were both minut and abund. he would 
a great deal of pain about apprent tegg the shoemak’s son, 
he would watch over tegg’s church-go; he would defend mr. 
the washerwoman against stubb’s unjust exact on the score of 
dry-ground, and he would himself scrutin a calumni against mr.
strype. hi privat minor loan were numer, but he would 
strictli into the circumst both befor and after. in thi wai 
man gather a domain in hi neighbor’ hope and fear as well 
gratitud; and power, when onc it ha got into that subtl region,
propag itself, spread out of all proport to it 
mean. it wa a principl with mr. bulstrod to gain as much power 
possibl, that he might us it for the glori of god. he went through 
great deal of spiritu conflict and inward argument in order to 
hi motiv, and make clear to himself what god’s glori requir. but,
as we have seen, hi motiv were not alwai rightli appreci. 
were mani crass mind in middlemarch whose reflect scale could 
weigh thing in the lump; and thei had a strong suspicion that 
mr. bulstrod could not enjoi life in their fashion, eat 
drink so littl as he did, and worret himself about everyth,
he must have a sort of vampir’s feast in the sens of masteri.

the subject of the chaplainci came up at mr. vinci’s tabl when 
wa dine there, and the famili connect with mr. bulstrod did not,
he observ, prevent some freedom of remark even on the part of 
host himself, though hi reason against the propos 
turn entir on hi object to mr. tyke’s sermon, which were 
doctrin, and hi prefer for mr. farebroth, whose sermon 
free from that taint. mr. vinci like well enough the notion of 
chaplain’s have a salari, suppos it were given to farebroth, 
wa as good a littl fellow as ever breath, and the best 
anywher, and companion too.

“what line shall you take, then?” said mr. chich, the coron, 
great cours comrad of mr. vinci’s.

“oh, i’m preciou glad i’m not on of the director now. i shall 
for refer the matter to the director and the medic 
togeth. i shall roll some of my respons on your shoulder,
doctor,” said mr. vinci, glanc first at dr. spragu, the 
physician of the town, and then at lydgat who sat opposit. “
medic gentlemen must consult which sort of black draught you 
prescrib, eh, mr. lydgat?”

“i know littl of either,” said lydgat; “but in gener, 
ar apt to be made too much a question of person like. the 
man for a particular post is not alwai the best fellow or the 
agreeabl. sometim, if you want to get a reform, your onli 
would be to pension off the good fellow whom everybodi is fond of, 
put them out of the question.”

dr. spragu, who wa consid the physician of most “weight,” 
dr. minchin wa usual said to have more “penetr,” divest 
larg heavi face of all express, and look at hi wine-glass 
lydgat wa speak. whatev wa not problemat and 
about thi young man—for exampl, a certain showi as to 
idea, and a disposit to unsettl what had been settl 
forgotten by hi elder—wa posit unwelcom to a physician 
stand had been fix thirti year befor by a treatis 
mening, of which at least on copi mark “own” wa bound in calf.
for my part i have some fellow-feel with dr. spragu: on’
self-satisfact is an untax kind of properti which it is 
unpleas to find deprec.

lydgat’s remark, howev, did not meet the sens of the compani. mr.
vinci said, that if he could have _hi_ wai, he would not 
disagre fellow anywher.

“hang your reform!” said mr. chich. “there’s no greater humbug 
the world. you never hear of a reform, but it mean some trick to 
in new men. i hope you ar not on of the ‘lancet’s’ men, mr.
lydgat—want to take the coronership out of the hand of the 
profess: your word appear to point that wai.”

“i disapprov of waklei,” interpos dr. spragu, “no man more: he 
an ill-intent fellow, who would sacrific the respect 
the profess, which everybodi know depend on the london colleg,
for the sake of get some notorieti for himself. there ar men 
don’t mind about be kick blue if thei can onli get talk about.
but waklei is right sometim,” the doctor ad, judici. “i 
mention on or two point in which waklei is in the right.”

“oh, well,” said mr. chich, “i blame no man for stand up in 
of hi own cloth; but, come to argument, i should like to know how 
coron is to judg of evid if he ha not had a legal train?”

“in my opinion,” said lydgat, “legal train onli make a man 
incompet in question that requir knowledg of anoth kind. 
talk about evid as if it could realli be weigh in scale by 
blind justic. no man can judg what is good evid on ani 
subject, unless he know that subject well. a lawyer is no better 
an old woman at a post-mortem examin. how is he to know the 
of a poison? you might as well sai that scan vers will teach 
to scan the potato crop.”

“you ar awar, i suppos, that it is not the coron’s busi 
conduct the _post-mortem_, but onli to take the evid of the 
wit?” said mr. chich, with some scorn.

“who is often almost as ignor as the coron himself,” said lydgat.
“question of medic jurisprud ought not to be left to the 
of decent knowledg in a medic wit, and the coron ought not 
be a man who will believ that strychnin will destroi the coat of 
stomach if an ignor practition happen to tell him so.”

lydgat had realli lost sight of the fact that mr. chich wa 
majesti’s coron, and end innoc with the question, “don’t 
agre with me, dr. spragu?”

“to a certain extent—with regard to popul district, and in 
metropoli,” said the doctor. “but i hope it will be long befor 
part of the countri lose the servic of my friend chich, 
though it might get the best man in our profess to succe him. i 
sure vinci will agre with me.”

“ye, ye, give me a coron who is a good cours man,” said mr.
vinci, jovial. “and in my opinion, you’re safest with a lawyer.
nobodi can know everyth. most thing ar ‘visit of god.’ and 
to poison, why, what you want to know is the law. come, shall 
join the ladi?”

lydgat’s privat opinion wa that mr. chich might be the 
coron without bia as to the coat of the stomach, but he had 
meant to be person. thi wa on of the difficulti of move 
good middlemarch societi: it wa danger to insist on knowledg as 
qualif for ani salari offic. fred vinci had call lydgat 
prig, and now mr. chich wa inclin to call him prick-ear;
especi when, in the draw-room, he seem to be make 
emin agreeabl to rosamond, whom he had easili monopol in 
_tête-à-tête_, sinc mr. vinci herself sat at the tea-tabl. 
resign no domest function to her daughter; and the matron’
bloom good-natur face, with the two volatil pink string 
from her fine throat, and her cheeri manner to husband and children,
wa certainli among the great attract of the 
hous—attract which made it all the easier to fall in love with 
daughter. the ting of unpretenti, inoffens vulgar in mr.
vinci gave more effect to rosamond’s refin, which wa beyond 
lydgat had expect.

certainli, small feet and perfectli turn shoulder aid the 
of refin manner, and the right thing said seem quit 
right when it is accompani with exquisit curv of lip and eyelid.
and rosamond could sai the right thing; for she wa clever with 
sort of clever which catch everi tone except the humor.
happili she never attempt to joke, and thi perhap wa the 
decis mark of her clever.

she and lydgat readili got into convers. he regret that he 
not heard her sing the other dai at stone court. the onli pleasur 
allow himself dure the latter part of hi stai in pari wa to 
and hear music.

“you have studi music, probabl?” said rosamond.

“no, i know the note of mani bird, and i know mani melodi by ear;
but the music that i don’t know at all, and have no notion about,
delight me—affect me. how stupid the world is that it doe not 
more us of such a pleasur within it reach!”

“ye, and you will find middlemarch veri tuneless. there ar hardli 
good musician. i onli know two gentlemen who sing at all well.”

“i suppos it is the fashion to sing comic song in a rhythmic wai,
leav you to fanci the tune—veri much as if it were tap on 
drum?”

“ah, you have heard mr. bowyer,” said rosamond, with on of her 
smile. “but we ar speak veri ill of our neighbor.”

lydgat wa almost forget that he must carri on the convers,
in think how love thi creatur wa, her garment seem to 
made out of the faintest blue sky, herself so immacul blond, as 
the petal of some gigant flower had just open and disclos her;
and yet with thi infantin blond show so much readi,
self-possess grace. sinc he had had the memori of laur, lydgat 
lost all tast for larg-ei silenc: the divin cow no 
attract him, and rosamond wa her veri opposit. but he 
himself.

“you will let me hear some music to-night, i hope.”

“i will let you hear my attempt, if you like,” said rosamond. “papa 
sure to insist on my sing. but i shall trembl befor you, who 
heard the best singer in pari. i have heard veri littl: i have 
onc been to london. but our organist at st. peter’s is a 
musician, and i go on studi with him.”

“tell me what you saw in london.”

“veri littl.” (a more naiv girl would have said, “oh, everyth!”
but rosamond knew better.) “a few of the ordinari sight, such as 
countri girl ar alwai taken to.”

“do you call yourself a raw countri girl?” said lydgat, look at 
with an involuntari emphasi of admir, which made rosamond 
with pleasur. but she remain simpli seriou, turn her long neck 
littl, and put up her hand to touch her wondrou hair-plait—
habitu gestur with her as pretti as ani movement of a kitten’s paw.
not that rosamond wa in the least like a kitten: she wa a 
caught young and educ at mr. lemon’s.

“i assur you my mind is raw,” she said immedi; “i pass 
middlemarch. i am not afraid of talk to our old neighbor. but i 
realli afraid of you.”

“an accomplish woman almost alwai know more than we men, though 
knowledg is of a differ sort. i am sure you could teach me 
thousand thing—as an exquisit bird could teach a bear if there 
ani common languag between them. happili, there is a common 
between women and men, and so the bear can get taught.”

“ah, there is fred begin to strum! i must go and hinder him 
jar all your nerv,” said rosamond, move to the other side 
the room, where fred have open the piano, at hi father’s desir,
that rosamond might give them some music, wa 
perform “cherri ripe!” with on hand. abl men who have pass 
examin will do these thing sometim, not less than the 
fred.

“fred, prai defer your practis till to-morrow; you will make mr.
lydgat ill,” said rosamond. “he ha an ear.”

fred laugh, and went on with hi tune to the end.

rosamond turn to lydgat, smile gentli, and said, “you perceiv,
the bear will not alwai be taught.”

“now then, rosi!” said fred, spring from the stool and twist 
upward for her, with a hearti expect of enjoy. “some 
rous tune first.”

rosamond plai admir. her master at mr. lemon’s school (close 
a counti town with a memor histori that had it relic in 
and castl) wa on of those excel musician here and there to 
found in our provinc, worthi to compar with mani a 
kapellmeist in a countri which offer more plenti condit 
music celebr. rosamond, with the execut’s instinct, had 
hi manner of plai, and gave forth hi larg render of 
music with the precis of an echo. it wa almost startl, heard 
the first time. a hidden soul seem to be flow forth 
rosamond’s finger; and so inde it wa, sinc soul live on 
perpetu echo, and to all fine express there goe somewher 
origin activ, if it be onli that of an interpret. lydgat 
taken possess of, and began to believ in her as 
except. after all, he thought, on need not be surpris to 
the rare conjunct of natur under circumst 
unfavor: come where thei mai, thei alwai depend on condit 
ar not obviou. he sat look at her, and did not rise to pai her 
compliment, leav that to other, now that hi admir 
deepen.

her sing wa less remark, but also well train, and sweet 
hear as a chime perfectli in tune. it is true she sang “meet me 
moonlight,” and “i’ve been roam”; for mortal must share 
fashion of their time, and none but the ancient can be 
classic. but rosamond could also sing “black-ei susan” with effect,
or haydn’s canzonet, or “voi, che sapet,” or “batti, batti”—she 
want to know what her audienc like.

her father look round at the compani, delight in their admir.
her mother sat, like a niob befor her troubl, with her 
littl girl on her lap, softli beat the child’s hand up and down 
time to the music. and fred, notwithstand hi gener 
about rosi, listen to her music with perfect allegi, wish 
could do the same thing on hi flute. it wa the pleasantest 
parti that lydgat had seen sinc he came to middlemarch. the 
had the readi to enjoi, the reject of all anxieti, and 
belief in life as a merri lot, which made a hous except in 
counti town at that time, when evangel had cast a 
suspicion as of plagu-infect over the few amus which 
in the provinc. at the vinci’ there wa alwai whist, and 
card-tabl stood readi now, make some of the compani 
impati of the music. befor it ceas mr. farebroth came in—
handsom, broad-chest but otherwis small man, about forti, 
black wa veri threadbar: the brillianc wa all in hi quick 
ey. he came like a pleasant chang in the light, arrest 
louisa with fatherli nonsens as she wa be led out of the room 
miss morgan, greet everybodi with some special word, and seem 
condens more talk into ten minut than had been held all through 
even. he claim from lydgat the fulfil of a promis to 
and see him. “i can’t let you off, you know, becaus i have 
beetl to show you. we collector feel an interest in everi new 
till he ha seen all we have to show him.”

but soon he swerv to the whist-tabl, rub hi hand and sai,
“come now, let us be seriou! mr. lydgat? not plai? ah! you ar 
young and light for thi kind of thing.”

lydgat said to himself that the clergyman whose abil were 
pain to mr. bulstrod, appear to have found an agreeabl resort 
thi certainli not erudit household. he could half understand it: 
good-humor, the good look of elder and younger, and the provis 
pass the time without ani labor of intellig, might make 
hous beguil to peopl who had no particular us for their 
hour.

everyth look bloom and joyou except miss morgan, who 
brown, dull, and resign, and altogeth, as mr. vinci often said,
just the sort of person for a gover. lydgat did not mean to 
mani such visit himself. thei were a wretch wast of the even;
and now, when he had talk a littl more to rosamond, he meant 
excus himself and go.

“you will not like us at middlemarch, i feel sure,” she said, when 
whist-player were settl. “we ar veri stupid, and you have been 
to someth quit differ.”

“i suppos all countri town ar pretti much alik,” said lydgat. “
i have notic that on alwai believ on’s own town to be 
stupid than ani other. i have made up my mind to take middlemarch as 
come, and shall be much oblig if the town will take me in the 
wai. i have certainli found some charm in it which ar much 
than i had expect.”

“you mean the ride toward tipton and lowick; everi on is 
with those,” said rosamond, with simplic.

“no, i mean someth much nearer to me.”

rosamond rose and reach her net, and then said, “do you 
about danc at all? i am not quit sure whether clever men 
danc.”

“i would danc with you if you would allow me.”

“oh!” said rosamond, with a slight deprecatori laugh. “i wa onli 
to sai that we sometim have danc, and i want to know whether 
would feel insult if you were ask to come.”

“not on the condit i mention.”

after thi chat lydgat thought that he wa go, but on 
toward the whist-tabl, he got interest in watch mr.
farebroth’s plai, which wa masterli, and also hi face, which wa 
strike mixtur of the shrewd and the mild. at ten o’clock supper 
brought in (such were the custom of middlemarch) and there 
punch-drink; but mr. farebroth had onli a glass of water. he 
win, but there seem to be no reason why the renew of 
should end, and lydgat at last took hi leav.

but as it wa not eleven o’clock, he chose to walk in the brisk 
toward the tower of st. botolph’s, mr. farebroth’s church, 
stood out dark, squar, and massiv against the starlight. it wa 
oldest church in middlemarch; the live, howev, wa but a 
worth bare four hundr a-year. lydgat had heard that, and 
wonder now whether mr. farebroth care about the monei he won 
card; think, “he seem a veri pleasant fellow, but bulstrod 
have hi good reason.” mani thing would be easier to lydgat if 
should turn out that mr. bulstrod wa gener justifi. “what 
hi religi doctrin to me, if he carri some good notion 
with it? on must us such brain as ar to be found.”

these were actual lydgat’s first medit as he walk awai 
mr. vinci’s, and on thi ground i fear that mani ladi will 
him hardli worthi of their attent. he thought of rosamond and 
music onli in the second place; and though, when her turn came, 
dwelt on the imag of her for the rest of hi walk, he felt 
agit, and had no sens that ani new current had set into hi life.
he could not marri yet; he wish not to marri for sever year; 
therefor he wa not readi to entertain the notion of be in 
with a girl whom he happen to admir. he did admir 
exceedingli; but that mad which had onc beset him about laur 
not, he thought, like to recur in relat to ani other woman.
certainli, if fall in love had been at all in question, it 
have been quit safe with a creatur like thi miss vinci, who had 
the kind of intellig on would desir in a woman—polish, refin,
docil, lend itself to finish in all the delicaci of life, 
enshrin in a bodi which express thi with a forc of 
that exclud the need for other evid. lydgat felt sure that 
ever he marri, hi wife would have that feminin radianc, 
distinct womanhood which must be class with flower and music,
that sort of beauti which by it veri natur wa virtuou, 
mould onli for pure and delic joi.

but sinc he did not mean to marri for the next five year—hi 
press busi wa to look into loui’ new book on fever, which 
wa special interest in, becaus he had known loui in pari, 
had follow mani anatom demonstr in order to ascertain 
specif differ of typhu and typhoid. he went home and read 
into the smallest hour, bring a much more test vision of 
and relat into thi patholog studi than he had ever thought 
necessari to appli to the complex of love and marriag, 
be subject on which he felt himself ampli inform by literatur,
and that tradit wisdom which is hand down in the 
convers of men. wherea fever had obscur condit, and gave 
that delight labor of the imagin which is not 
arbitrari, but the exercis of disciplin power—combin 
construct with the clearest ey for probabl and the 
obedi to knowledg; and then, in yet more energet allianc 
imparti natur, stand aloof to invent test by which to try 
own work.

mani men have been prais as vividli imagin on the strength 
their profus in indiffer draw or cheap narrat:—report 
veri poor talk go on in distant orb; or portrait of lucif 
down on hi bad errand as a larg ugli man with bat’s wing and 
of phosphoresc; or exagger of wanton that seem to 
life in a diseas dream. but these kind of inspir 
regard as rather vulgar and vinou compar with the imagin 
reveal subtl action inaccess by ani sort of len, but track 
that outer dark through long pathwai of necessari sequenc by 
inward light which is the last refin of energi, capabl of 
even the ether atom in it ideal illumin space. he for 
part had toss awai all cheap invent where ignor find 
abl and at eas: he wa enamour of that arduou invent which 
the veri ey of research, provision frame it object 
correct it to more and more exact of relat; he want 
pierc the obscur of those minut process which prepar 
miseri and joi, those invis thoroughfar which ar the 
lurk-place of anguish, mania, and crime, that delic pois 
transit which determin the growth of happi or 
conscious.

as he threw down hi book, stretch hi leg toward the ember in 
grate, and clasp hi hand at the back of hi head, in that 
afterglow of excit when thought laps from examin of 
specif object into a suffus sens of it connect with all 
rest of our exist—seem, as it were, to throw itself on it 
after vigor swim and float with the repos of 
strength—lydgat felt a triumphant delight in hi studi, 
someth like piti for those less lucki men who were not of 
profess.

“if i had not taken that turn when i wa a lad,” he thought, “i 
have got into some stupid draught-hors work or other, and live 
in blinker. i should never have been happi in ani profess that 
not call forth the highest intellectu strain, and yet keep me in 
warm contact with my neighbor. there is noth like the 
profess for that: on can have the exclus scientif life 
touch the distanc and befriend the old fogi in the parish too. 
is rather harder for a clergyman: farebroth seem to be an anomali.”

thi last thought brought back the vinci and all the pictur of 
even. thei float in hi mind agreeabl enough, and as he took 
hi bed-candl hi lip were curl with that incipi smile which 
apt to accompani agreeabl recollect. he wa an ardent fellow, 
at present hi ardor wa absorb in love of hi work and in 
ambit of make hi life recogn as a factor in the better 
of mankind—like other hero of scienc who had noth but an 
countri practic to begin with.

poor lydgat! or shall i sai, poor rosamond! each live in a world 
which the other knew noth. it had not occur to lydgat that 
had been a subject of eager medit to rosamond, who had neither 
reason for throw her marriag into distant perspect, nor 
patholog studi to divert her mind from that rumin habit,
that inward repetit of look, word, and phrase, which make 
larg part in the live of most girl. he had not meant to look at 
or speak to her with more than the inevit amount of admir 
compliment which a man must give to a beauti girl; inde, it 
to him that hi enjoy of her music had remain almost silent, 
he fear fall into the rude of tell her hi great 
at her possess of such accomplish. but rosamond had 
everi look and word, and estim them as the open incid of 
preconceiv romanc—incid which gather valu from the 
develop and climax. in rosamond’s romanc it wa not necessari 
imagin much about the inward life of the hero, or of hi 
busi in the world: of cours, he had a profess and wa clever,
as well as suffici handsom; but the piquant fact about 
wa hi good birth, which distinguish him from all 
admir, and present marriag as a prospect of rise in rank 
get a littl nearer to that celesti condit on earth in 
she would have noth to do with vulgar peopl, and perhap at 
associ with rel quit equal to the counti peopl who 
down on the middlemarch. it wa part of rosamond’s clever 
discern veri subtli the faintest aroma of rank, and onc when she 
seen the miss brook accompani their uncl at the counti assiz,
and seat among the aristocraci, she had envi them, 
their plain dress.

if you think it incred that to imagin lydgat as a man of 
could caus thrill of satisfact which had anyth to do with 
sens that she wa in love with him, i will ask you to us your 
of comparison a littl more effect, and consid whether red 
and epaulet have never had an influenc of that sort. our passion 
not live apart in lock chamber, but, dress in their small 
of notion, bring their provis to a common tabl and mess togeth,
feed out of the common store accord to their appetit.

rosamond, in fact, wa entir occupi not exactli with 
lydgat as he wa in himself, but with hi relat to her; and it 
excus in a girl who wa accustom to hear that all young 
might, could, would be, or actual were in love with her, to 
at onc that lydgat could be no except. hi look and word 
more to her than other men’s, becaus she care more for them: 
thought of them dilig, and dilig attend to that 
of appear, behavior, sentiment, and all other eleg, 
would find in lydgat a more adequ admir than she had yet 
consciou of.

for rosamond, though she would never do anyth that wa 
to her, wa industri; and now more than ever she wa activ 
sketch her landscap and market-cart and portrait of friend, 
practis her music, and in be from morn till night her 
standard of a perfect ladi, have alwai an audienc in her 
conscious, with sometim the not unwelcom addit of a 
variabl extern audienc in the numer visitor of the hous. 
found time also to read the best novel, and even the second best, 
she knew much poetri by heart. her favorit poem wa “lalla rookh.”

“the best girl in the world! he will be a happi fellow who get her!”
wa the sentiment of the elderli gentlemen who visit the vinci; 
the reject young men thought of try again, as is the fashion 
countri town where the horizon is not thick with come rival. 
mr. plymdal thought that rosamond had been educ to a 
pitch, for what wa the us of accomplish which would be all 
asid as soon as she wa marri? while her aunt bulstrod, who had 
sisterli faith toward her brother’s famili, had two 
wish for rosamond—that she might show a more seriou turn of mind,
and that she might meet with a husband whose wealth correspond to 
habit.




chapter xvii.

“the clerkli person smile and 
promis wa a pretti maid,
but be poor she di unw.”


the rev. camden farebroth, whom lydgat went to see the next even,
live in an old parsonag, built of stone, vener enough to 
the church which it look out upon. all the furnitur too in the 
wa old, but with anoth grade of ag—that of mr. farebroth’s 
and grandfath. there were paint white chair, with gild 
wreath on them, and some linger red silk damask with slit in it.
there were engrav portrait of lord chancellor and other 
lawyer of the last centuri; and there were old pier-glass to 
them, as well as the littl satin-wood tabl and the sofa 
a prolong of uneasi chair, all stand in relief against 
dark wainscot. thi wa the physiognomi of the draw-room into 
lydgat wa shown; and there were three ladi to receiv him, who 
also old-fashion, and of a fade but genuin respect: mr.
farebroth, the vicar’s white-hair mother, befril and 
with dainti cleanli, upright, quick-ei, and still under seventi;
miss nobl, her sister, a tini old ladi of meeker aspect, with 
and kerchief decidedli more worn and mend; and miss 
farebroth, the vicar’s elder sister, well-look like himself, 
nip and subdu as singl women ar apt to be who spend their 
in uninterrupt subject to their elder. lydgat had not 
to see so quaint a group: know simpli that mr. farebroth wa 
bachelor, he had thought of be usher into a snuggeri where 
chief furnitur would probabl be book and collect of 
object. the vicar himself seem to wear rather a chang aspect, 
most men do when acquaint made elsewher see them for the 
time in their own home; some inde show like an actor of 
part disadvantag cast for the curmudgeon in a new piec. 
wa not the case with mr. farebroth: he seem a trifl milder 
more silent, the chief talker be hi mother, while he onli put in 
good-humor moder remark here and there. the old ladi 
evid accustom to tell her compani what thei ought to think, 
to regard no subject as quit safe without her steer. she 
afford leisur for thi function by have all her littl 
attend to by miss winifr. meanwhil tini miss nobl carri on 
arm a small basket, into which she divert a bit of sugar, which 
had first drop in her saucer as if by mistak; look 
furtiv afterward, and revert to her teacup with a small 
nois as of a tini timid quadrup. prai think no ill of miss nobl.
that basket held small save from her more portabl food, 
for the children of her poor friend among whom she trot on 
morn; foster and pet all needi creatur be 
spontan a delight to her, that she regard it much as if it 
been a pleasant vice that she wa addict to. perhap she 
consciou of be tempt to steal from those who had much that 
might give to those who had noth, and carri in her conscienc 
guilt of that repress desir. on must be poor to know the luxuri 
give!

mr. farebroth welcom the guest with a live formal 
precis. she present inform him that thei were not often in 
of medic aid in that hous. she had brought up her children to 
flannel and not to over-eat themselv, which last habit she 
the chief reason why peopl need doctor. lydgat plead for 
whose father and mother had over-eaten themselv, but mr.
farebroth held that view of thing danger: natur wa more 
than that; it would be easi for ani felon to sai that hi 
ought to have been hang instead of him. if those who had bad 
and mother were bad themselv, thei were hang for that. there 
no need to go back on what you couldn’t see.

“my mother is like old georg the third,” said the vicar, “she 
to metaphys.”

“i object to what is wrong, camden. i sai, keep hold of a few 
truth, and make everyth squar with them. when i wa young, mr.
lydgat, there never wa ani question about right and wrong. we 
our catech, and that wa enough; we learn our creed and our duti.
everi respect church person had the same opinion. but now, if 
speak out of the prayer-book itself, you ar liabl to 
contradict.”

“that make rather a pleasant time of it for those who like to 
their own point,” said lydgat.

“but my mother alwai give wai,” said the vicar, slyli.

“no, no, camden, you must not lead mr. lydgat into a mistak 
_me_. i shall never show that disrespect to my parent, to give up 
thei taught me. ani on mai see what come of turn. if you 
onc, why not twenti time?”

“a man might see good argument for chang onc, and not see them 
chang again,” said lydgat, amus with the decis old ladi.

“excus me there. if you go upon argument, thei ar never want,
when a man ha no constanc of mind. my father never chang, and 
preach plain moral sermon without argument, and wa a good man—
better. when you get me a good man made out of argument, i will 
you a good dinner with read you the cookeri-book. that’s my opinion,
and i think anybodi’s stomach will bear me out.”

“about the dinner certainli, mother,” said mr. farebroth.

“it is the same thing, the dinner or the man. i am nearli seventi, mr.
lydgat, and i go upon experi. i am not like to follow 
light, though there ar plenti of them here as elsewher. i sai, 
came in with the mix stuff that will neither wash nor wear. it 
not so in my youth: a churchman wa a churchman, and a clergyman, 
might be pretti sure, wa a gentleman, if noth els. but now he 
be no better than a dissent, and want to push asid my son 
pretenc of doctrin. but whoever mai wish to push him asid, i 
proud to sai, mr. lydgat, that he will compar with ani preacher 
thi kingdom, not to speak of thi town, which is but a low standard 
go by; at least, to my think, for i wa born and bred at exet.”

“a mother is never partial,” said mr. farebroth, smile. “what 
you think tyke’s mother sai about him?”

“ah, poor creatur! what inde?” said mr. farebroth, her 
blunt for the moment by her confid in matern judgment. “
sai the truth to herself, depend upon it.”

“and what is the truth?” said lydgat. “i am curiou to know.”

“oh, noth bad at all,” said mr. farebroth. “he is a 
fellow: not veri learn, and not veri wise, i think—becaus i don’
agre with him.”

“why, camden!” said miss winifr, “griffin and hi wife told me 
to-dai, that mr. tyke said thei should have no more coal if thei 
to hear you preach.”

mr. farebroth laid down her knit, which she had resum 
her small allow of tea and toast, and look at her son as if 
sai “you hear that?” miss nobl said, “oh poor thing! poor thing!” 
refer, probabl, to the doubl loss of preach and coal. but 
vicar answer quietli—

“that is becaus thei ar not my parishion. and i don’t think 
sermon ar worth a load of coal to them.”

“mr. lydgat,” said mr. farebroth, who could not let thi pass, “
don’t know my son: he alwai undervalu himself. i tell him he 
undervalu the god who made him, and made him a most 
preacher.”

“that must be a hint for me to take mr. lydgat awai to my studi,
mother,” said the vicar, laugh. “i promis to show you 
collect,” he ad, turn to lydgat; “shall we go?”

all three ladi remonstr. mr. lydgat ought not to be hurri 
without be allow to accept anoth cup of tea: miss winifr 
abund of good tea in the pot. why wa camden in such hast to 
a visitor to hi den? there wa noth but pickl vermin, and 
full of blue-bottl and moth, with no carpet on the floor. mr.
lydgat must excus it. a game at cribbag would be far better. 
short, it wa plain that a vicar might be ador by hi womankind 
the king of men and preacher, and yet be held by them to stand in 
need of their direct. lydgat, with the usual shallow of a 
bachelor, wonder that mr. farebroth had not taught them better.

“my mother is not us to my have visitor who can take ani 
in my hobbi,” said the vicar, as he open the door of hi studi,
which wa inde as bare of luxuri for the bodi as the ladi 
impli, unless a short porcelain pipe and a tobacco-box were to 
except.

“men of your profess don’t gener smoke,” he said. lydgat 
and shook hi head. “nor of mine either, properli, i suppos. you 
hear that pipe alleg against me by bulstrod and compani. thei don’
know how pleas the devil would be if i gave it up.”

“i understand. you ar of an excit temper and want a sed. i 
heavier, and should get idl with it. i should rush into idl, 
stagnat there with all my might.”

“and you mean to give it all to your work. i am some ten or 
year older than you, and have come to a compromis. i feed a 
or two lest thei should get clamor. see,” continu the vicar,
open sever small drawer, “i fanci i have made an exhaust 
of the entomolog of thi district. i am go on both with the 
and flora; but i have at least done my insect well. we ar 
rich in orthoptera: i don’t know whether—ah! you have got hold of 
glass jar—you ar look into that instead of my drawer. you don’
realli care about these thing?”

“not by the side of thi love anencephal monster. i have never 
time to give myself much to natur histori. i wa earli bitten with 
interest in structur, and it is what li most directli in 
profess. i have no hobbi besid. i have the sea to swim in there.”

“ah! you ar a happi fellow,” said mr. farebroth, turn on hi 
and begin to fill hi pipe. “you don’t know what it is to 
spiritu tobacco—bad emend of old text, or small item about 
varieti of aphi brassica, with the well-known signatur 
philomicron, for the ‘twaddler’s magazin;’ or a learn treatis 
the entomolog of the pentateuch, includ all the insect 
mention, but probabl met with by the israelit in their 
through the desert; with a monograph on the ant, as treat by solomon,
show the harmoni of the book of proverb with the result of 
research. you don’t mind my fumig you?”

lydgat wa more surpris at the open of thi talk than at 
impli mean—that the vicar felt himself not altogeth in the 
vocat. the neat fit-up of drawer and shelv, and the 
fill with expens illustr book on natur histori, made 
think again of the win at card and their destin. but he 
begin to wish that the veri best construct of everyth 
mr. farebroth did should be the true on. the vicar’s 
seem not of the repuls sort that come from an 
conscious seek to forestal the judgment of other, but 
the relief of a desir to do with as littl pretenc as possibl.
appar he wa not without a sens that hi freedom of speech 
seem prematur, for he present said—

“i have not yet told you that i have the advantag of you, mr. lydgat,
and know you better than you know me. you rememb trawlei who 
your apart at pari for some time? i wa a correspond of hi,
and he told me a good deal about you. i wa not quit sure when 
first came that you were the same man. i wa veri glad when i 
that you were. onli i don’t forget that you have not had the 
prologu about me.”

lydgat divin some delicaci of feel here, but did not 
understand it. “by the wai,” he said, “what ha becom of trawlei? 
have quit lost sight of him. he wa hot on the french social system,
and talk of go to the backwood to found a sort of 
commun. is he gone?”

“not at all. he is practis at a german bath, and ha marri a 
patient.”

“then my notion wear the best, so far,” said lydgat, with a 
scorn laugh. “he would have it, the medic profess wa 
inevit system of humbug. i said, the fault wa in the men—men 
truckl to li and folli. instead of preach against humbug 
the wall, it might be better to set up a disinfect 
within. in short—i am report my own convers—you mai be sure 
had all the good sens on my side.”

“your scheme is a good deal more difficult to carri out than 
pythagorean commun, though. you have not onli got the old adam 
yourself against you, but you have got all those descend of 
origin adam who form the societi around you. you see, i have 
twelv or thirteen year more than you for my knowledg 
difficulti. but”—mr. farebroth broke off a moment, and then ad,
“you ar ei that glass vase again. do you want to make an exchang?
you shall not have it without a fair barter.”

“i have some sea-mice—fine specimen—in spirit. and i will throw 
robert brown’s new thing—‘microscop observ on the pollen 
plant’—if you don’t happen to have it alreadi.”

“why, see how you long for the monster, i might ask a higher price.
suppos i ask you to look through my drawer and agre with me 
all my new speci?” the vicar, while he talk in thi wai,
altern move about with hi pipe in hi mouth, and return 
hang rather fondli over hi drawer. “that would be good disciplin,
you know, for a young doctor who ha to pleas hi patient 
middlemarch. you must learn to be bore, rememb. howev, you 
have the monster on your own term.”

“don’t you think men overr the necess for humor everybodi’
nonsens, till thei get despis by the veri fool thei humor?” 
lydgat, move to mr. farebroth’s side, and look rather 
at the insect rang in fine gradat, with name subscrib 
exquisit write. “the shortest wai is to make your valu felt, 
that peopl must put up with you whether you flatter them or not.”

“with all my heart. but then you must be sure of have the valu, 
you must keep yourself independ. veri few men can do that. 
you slip out of servic altogeth, and becom good for noth, or 
wear the har and draw a good deal where your yoke-fellow pull you.
but do look at these delic orthoptera!”

lydgat had after all to give some scrutini to each drawer, the 
laugh at himself, and yet persist in the exhibit.

“apropo of what you said about wear har,” lydgat began, 
thei had sat down, “i made up my mind some time ago to do with 
littl of it as possibl. that wa why i determin not to try 
in london, for a good mani year at least. i didn’t like what i 
when i wa studi there—so much empti bigwigg, and 
trickeri. in the countri, peopl have less pretens to knowledg, 
ar less of companion, but for that reason thei affect on’
amour-propr less: on make less bad blood, and can follow on’s 
cours more quietli.”

“ye—well—you have got a good start; you ar in the right profess,
the work you feel yourself most fit for. some peopl miss that, 
repent too late. but you must not be too sure of keep 
independ.”

“you mean of famili ti?” said lydgat, conceiv that these 
press rather tightli on mr. farebroth.

“not altogeth. of cours thei make mani thing more difficult. but 
good wife—a good unworldli woman—mai realli help a man, and keep 
more independ. there’s a parishion of mine—a fine fellow, but 
would hardli have pull through as he ha done without hi wife. 
you know the garth? i think thei were not peacock’s patient.”

“no; but there is a miss garth at old featherston’s, at lowick.”

“their daughter: an excel girl.”

“she is veri quiet—i have hardli notic her.”

“she ha taken notic of you, though, depend upon it.”

“i don’t understand,” said lydgat; he could hardli sai “of cours.”

“oh, she gaug everybodi. i prepar her for confirm—she is 
favorit of mine.”

mr. farebroth puf a few moment in silenc, lydgat not care 
know more about the garth. at last the vicar laid down hi pipe,
stretch out hi leg, and turn hi bright ey with a smile 
lydgat, sai—

“but we middlemarch ar not so tame as you take us to be. we 
our intrigu and our parti. i am a parti man, for exampl, 
bulstrod is anoth. if you vote for me you will offend bulstrod.”

“what is there against bulstrod?” said lydgat, emphat.

“i did not sai there wa anyth against him except that. if you 
against him you will make him your enemi.”

“i don’t know that i need mind about that,” said lydgat, 
proudli; “but he seem to have good idea about hospit, and 
spend larg sum on us public object. he might help me a 
deal in carri out my idea. as to hi religi notion—why, 
voltair said, incant will destroi a flock of sheep 
administ with a certain quantiti of arsen. i look for the man 
will bring the arsen, and don’t mind about hi incant.”

“veri good. but then you must not offend your arsen-man. you will 
offend me, you know,” said mr. farebroth, quit unaffectedli. “
don’t translat my own conveni into other peopl’s duti. i 
oppos to bulstrod in mani wai. i don’t like the set he belong to:
thei ar a narrow ignor set, and do more to make their 
uncomfort than to make them better. their system is a sort 
worldli-spiritu cliqueism: thei realli look on the rest of mankind 
a doom carcass which is to nourish them for heaven. but,” he ad,
smilingli, “i don’t sai that bulstrod’s new hospit is a bad thing;
and as to hi want to oust me from the old on—why, if he think 
a mischiev fellow, he is onli return a compliment. and i am not 
model clergyman—onli a decent makeshift.”

lydgat wa not at all sure that the vicar malign himself. a 
clergyman, like a model doctor, ought to think hi own profess 
finest in the world, and take all knowledg as mere nourish to 
moral patholog and therapeut. he onli said, “what reason 
bulstrod give for supersed you?”

“that i don’t teach hi opinion—which he call spiritu religion; 
that i have no time to spare. both statement ar true. but then 
could make time, and i should be glad of the forti pound. that is 
plain fact of the case. but let us dismiss it. i onli want to 
you that if you vote for your arsen-man, you ar not to cut me 
consequ. i can’t spare you. you ar a sort of circumnavig 
to settl among us, and will keep up my belief in the antipod. 
tell me all about them in pari.”




chapter xviii.

“oh, sir, the loftiest hope on 
draw lot with meaner hope: heroic breast,
breath bad air, run risk of pestil;
or, lack lime-juic when thei cross the line,
mai languish with the scurvi.”


some week pass after thi convers befor the question of 
chaplainci gather ani practic import for lydgat, and 
tell himself the reason, he defer the predetermin on 
side he should give hi vote. it would realli have been a matter 
total indiffer to him—that is to sai, he would have taken the 
conveni side, and given hi vote for the appoint of tyke 
ani hesit—if he had not care person for mr. farebroth.

but hi like for the vicar of st. botolph’s grew with 
acquaintanceship. that, enter into lydgat’s posit as a new-
who had hi own profession object to secur, mr. farebroth 
have taken pain rather to warn off than to obtain hi interest, 
an unusu delicaci and generos, which lydgat’s natur wa 
aliv to. it went along with other point of conduct in mr. 
which were exception fine, and made hi charact resembl 
southern landscap which seem divid between natur grandeur 
social slovenli. veri few men could have been as filial 
chivalr as he wa to the mother, aunt, and sister, whose 
on him had in mani wai shape hi life rather uneasili for himself;
few men who feel the pressur of small need ar so nobli resolut 
to dress up their inevit self-interest desir in a pretext 
better motiv. in these matter he wa consciou that hi life 
bear the closest scrutini; and perhap the conscious encourag 
littl defianc toward the critic strict of person 
celesti intimaci seem not to improv their domest manner, 
whose lofti aim were not need to account for their action. then,
hi preach wa ingeni and pithi, like the preach of 
english church in it robust ag, and hi sermon were 
without book. peopl outsid hi parish went to hear him; and, sinc 
fill the church wa alwai the most difficult part of a clergyman’
function, here wa anoth ground for a careless sens of superior.
besid, he wa a likabl man: sweet-temper, readi-wit, frank,
without grin of suppress bitter or other convers 
which make half of us an afflict to our friend. lydgat like 
heartili, and wish for hi friendship.

with thi feel uppermost, he continu to waiv the question of 
chaplainci, and to persuad himself that it wa not onli no 
busi of hi, but like enough never to vex him with a demand 
hi vote. lydgat, at mr. bulstrod’s request, wa lai down 
for the intern arrang of the new hospit, and the two 
often in consult. the banker wa alwai presuppos that he 
count in gener on lydgat as a coadjutor, but made no 
recurr to the come decis between tyke and farebroth. 
the gener board of the infirmari had met, howev, and lydgat 
notic that the question of the chaplainci wa thrown on a council 
the director and medic men, to meet on the follow fridai, he 
a vex sens that he must make up hi mind on thi trivial 
busi. he could not help hear within him the distinct 
that bulstrod wa prime minist, and that the tyke affair wa 
question of offic or no offic; and he could not help an 
pronounc dislik to give up the prospect of offic. for 
observ wa constantli confirm mr. farebroth’s assur 
the banker would not overlook opposit. “confound their 
polit!” wa on of hi thought for three morn in the 
process of shave, when he had begun to feel that he must realli 
a court of conscienc on thi matter. certainli there were valid 
to be said against the elect of mr. farebroth: he had too much 
hi hand alreadi, especi consid how much time he spent 
non-cleric occup. then again it wa a continu 
shock, disturb lydgat’s esteem, that the vicar should 
plai for the sake of monei, like the plai inde, but 
like some end which it serv. mr. farebroth contend on 
for the desir of all game, and said that englishmen’s wit 
stagnant for want of them; but lydgat felt certain that he would 
plai veri much less but for the monei. there wa a billiard-room 
the green dragon, which some anxiou mother and wive regard as 
chief temptat in middlemarch. the vicar wa a first-
billiard-player, and though he did not frequent the green dragon, 
were report that he had sometim been there in the daytim and 
won monei. and as to the chaplainci, he did not pretend that he 
for it, except for the sake of the forti pound. lydgat wa 
puritan, but he did not care for plai, and win monei at it 
alwai seem a mean to him; besid, he had an ideal of life 
made thi subservi of conduct to the gain of small 
thoroughli hate to him. hitherto in hi own life hi want had 
suppli without ani troubl to himself, and hi first impuls 
alwai to be liber with half-crown as matter of no import to 
gentleman; it had never occur to him to devis a plan for 
half-crown. he had alwai known in a gener wai that he wa not rich,
but he had never felt poor, and he had no power of imagin the 
which the want of monei plai in determin the action of men. 
had never been a motiv to him. henc he wa not readi to frame 
for thi deliber pursuit of small gain. it wa altogeth 
to him, and he never enter into ani calcul of the ratio 
the vicar’s incom and hi more or less necessari expenditur. it 
possibl that he would not have made such a calcul in hi 
case.

and now, when the question of vote had come, thi repuls fact 
more strongli against mr. farebroth than it had done befor. 
would know much better what to do if men’s charact were 
consist, and especi if on’s friend were invari fit for 
function thei desir to undertak! lydgat wa convinc that if 
had been no valid object to mr. farebroth, he would have vote 
him, whatev bulstrod might have felt on the subject: he did 
intend to be a vassal of bulstrod’s. on the other hand, there 
tyke, a man entir given to hi cleric offic, who wa 
curat at a chapel of eas in st. peter’s parish, and had time 
extra duti. nobodi had anyth to sai against mr. tyke, except 
thei could not bear him, and suspect him of cant. realli, from 
point of view, bulstrod wa thoroughli justifi.

but whichev wai lydgat began to inclin, there wa someth to 
him winc; and be a proud man, he wa a littl exasper at 
oblig to winc. he did not like frustrat hi own best purpos 
get on bad term with bulstrod; he did not like vote 
farebroth, and help to depriv him of function and salari; and 
question occur whether the addit forti pound might not 
the vicar free from that ignobl care about win at card. moreov,
lydgat did not like the conscious that in vote for tyke 
should be vote on the side obvious conveni for himself. 
would the end realli be hi own conveni? other peopl would sai so,
and would alleg that he wa curri favor with bulstrod for the 
of make himself import and get on in the world. what then? 
for hi own part knew that if hi person prospect simpli had 
concern, he would not have care a rotten nut for the banker’
friendship or enmiti. what he realli care for wa a medium for 
work, a vehicl for hi idea; and after all, wa he not bound 
prefer the object of get a good hospit, where he 
demonstr the specif distinct of fever and test 
result, befor anyth els connect with thi chaplainci? for 
first time lydgat wa feel the hamper threadlik pressur 
small social condit, and their frustrat complex. at the 
of hi inward debat, when he set out for the hospit, hi hope 
realli in the chanc that discuss might somehow give a new aspect 
the question, and make the scale dip so as to exclud the necess 
vote. i think he trust a littl also to the energi which 
begotten by circumst—some feel rush warmli and 
resolv easi, while debat in cool blood had onli made it 
difficult. howev it wa, he did not distinctli sai to himself 
which side he would vote; and all the while he wa inwardli 
the subject which had been forc upon him. it would have 
beforehand like a ridicul piec of bad logic that he, with 
unmix resolut of independ and hi select purpos, would 
himself at the veri outset in the grasp of petti altern, each 
which wa repugn to him. in hi student’s chamber, he 
prearrang hi social action quit differ.

lydgat wa late in set out, but dr. spragu, the two 
surgeon, and sever of the director had arriv earli; mr.
bulstrod, treasur and chairman, be among those who were 
absent. the convers seem to impli that the issu 
problemat, and that a major for tyke wa not so certain as 
been gener suppos. the two physician, for a wonder, turn 
to be unanim, or rather, though of differ mind, thei 
in action. dr. spragu, the rug and weighti, wa, as everi on 
foreseen, an adher of mr. farebroth. the doctor wa more 
suspect of have no religion, but somehow middlemarch toler 
defici in him as if he had been a lord chancellor; inde it 
probabl that hi profession weight wa the more believ in, 
world-old associ of clever with the evil principl be 
potent in the mind even of ladi-patient who had the strictest 
of frill and sentiment. it wa perhap thi negat in the 
which made hi neighbor call him hard-head and dry-wit;
condit of textur which were also held favor to the store 
judgment connect with drug. at all event, it is certain that 
ani medic man had come to middlemarch with the reput of 
veri definit religi view, of be given to prayer, and 
otherwis show an activ pieti, there would have been a 
presumpt against hi medic skill.

on thi ground it wa (profession speak) fortun for dr.
minchin that hi religi sympathi were of a gener kind, and 
as gave a distant medic sanction to all seriou sentiment, whether 
church or dissent, rather than ani adhes to particular tenet. 
mr. bulstrod insist, as he wa apt to do, on the lutheran 
of justif, as that by which a church must stand or fall, dr.
minchin in return wa quit sure that man wa not a mere machin or 
fortuit conjunct of atom; if mr. wimpl insist on 
particular provid in relat to her stomach complaint, dr. 
for hi part like to keep the mental window open and object 
fix limit; if the unitarian brewer jest about the 
creed, dr. minchin quot pope’s “essai on man.” he object to 
rather free style of anecdot in which dr. spragu indulg, 
well-sanction quotat, and like refin of all kind: it 
gener known that he had some kinship to a bishop, and 
spent hi holidai at “the palac.”

dr. minchin wa soft-hand, pale-complexion, and of round outlin,
not to be distinguish from a mild clergyman in appear: 
dr. spragu wa superflu tall; hi trouser got creas at 
knee, and show an excess of boot at a time when strap 
necessari to ani digniti of bear; you heard him go in and out, 
up and down, as if he had come to see after the roof. in short, 
had weight, and might be expect to grappl with a diseas and 
it; while dr. minchin might be better abl to detect it lurk and 
circumv it. thei enjoi about equal the mysteri privileg 
medic reput, and conceal with much etiquett their 
for each other’s skill. regard themselv as 
institut, thei were readi to combin against all innov, 
against non-profession given to interfer. on thi ground 
were both in their heart equal avers to mr. bulstrod, though dr.
minchin had never been in open hostil with him, and never 
from him without elabor explan to mr. bulstrod, who had 
that dr. minchin alon understood her constitut. a layman who 
into the profession conduct of medic men, and wa alwai 
hi reform,—though he wa less directli embarrass to the 
physician than to the surgeon-apothecari who attend pauper 
contract, wa nevertheless offens to the profession nostril 
such; and dr. minchin share fulli in the new piqu against bulstrod,
excit by hi appar determin to patron lydgat. 
long-establish practition, mr. wrench and mr. toller; were 
now stand apart and have a friendli colloqui, in which thei 
that lydgat wa a jackanap, just made to serv bulstrod’s purpos.
to non-medic friend thei had alreadi concur in prais the 
young practition, who had come into the town on mr. peacock’
retir without further recommend than hi own merit and 
argument for solid profession acquir as might be gather 
hi have appar wast no time on other branch of knowledg. 
wa clear that lydgat, by not dispens drug, intend to 
imput on hi equal, and also to obscur the limit between 
own rank as a gener practition and that of the physician, who, 
the interest of the profess, felt bound to maintain it 
grade,—especi against a man who had not been to either of 
english univers and enjoi the absenc of anatom and 
studi there, but came with a libel pretens to experi 
edinburgh and pari, where observ might be abund inde, 
hardli sound.

thu it happen that on thi occas bulstrod becam identifi 
lydgat, and lydgat with tyke; and ow to thi varieti 
interchang name for the chaplainci question, divers mind 
enabl to form the same judgment concern it.

dr. spragu said at onc bluntli to the group assembl when 
enter, “i go for farebroth. a salari, with all my heart. but 
take it from the vicar? he ha none too much—ha to insur hi life,
besid keep hous, and do a vicar’s chariti. put forti 
in hi pocket and you’ll do no harm. he’s a good fellow, 
farebroth, with as littl of the parson about him as will serv 
carri order.”

“ho, ho! doctor,” said old mr. powderel, a retir iron-monger of 
stand—hi interject be someth between a laugh and 
parliamentari disapprov; “we must let you have your sai. but what 
have to consid is not anybodi’s incom—it’s the soul of the 
sick peopl”—here mr. powderel’s voic and face had a sincer 
in them. “he is a real gospel preacher, is mr. tyke. i should 
against my conscienc if i vote against mr. tyke—i should inde.”

“mr. tyke’s oppon have not ask ani on to vote against 
conscienc, i believ,” said mr. hackbutt, a rich tanner of 
speech, whose glitter spectacl and erect hair were turn 
some sever toward innoc mr. powderel. “but in my judgment 
behov us, as director, to consid whether we will regard it as 
whole busi to carri out proposit eman from a 
quarter. will ani member of the committe aver that he would 
entertain the idea of displac the gentleman who ha 
discharg the function of chaplain here, if it had not been 
to him by parti whose disposit it is to regard everi 
of thi town as a machineri for carri out their own view? i tax 
man’s motiv: let them lie between himself and a higher power; but 
do sai, that there ar influenc at work here which ar 
with genuin independ, and that a crawl servil is 
dictat by circumst which gentlemen so conduct 
could not afford either moral or financi to avow. i myself am 
layman, but i have given no inconsider attent to the 
in the church and—”

“oh, damn the divis!” burst in mr. frank hawlei, lawyer 
town-clerk, who rare present himself at the board, but now 
in hurriedli, whip in hand. “we have noth to do with them here.
farebroth ha been do the work—what there wa—without pai, and 
pai is to be given, it should be given to him. i call it a 
job to take the thing awai from farebroth.”

“i think it would be as well for gentlemen not to give their remark 
person bear,” said mr. plymdal. “i shall vote for the 
of mr. tyke, but i should not have known, if mr. hackbutt hadn’t 
it, that i wa a servil crawler.”

“i disclaim ani person. i expressli said, if i mai be allow 
repeat, or even to conclud what i wa about to sai—”

“ah, here’s minchin!” said mr. frank hawlei; at which everybodi 
awai from mr. hackbutt, leav him to feel the useless of 
gift in middlemarch. “come, doctor, i must have you on the right side,
eh?”

“i hope so,” said dr. minchin, nod and shake hand here 
there; “at whatev cost to my feel.”

“if there’s ani feel here, it should be feel for the man who 
turn out, i think,” said mr. frank hawlei.

“i confess i have feel on the other side also. i have a 
esteem,” said dr. minchin, rub hi hand. “i consid mr. tyke 
exemplari man—none more so—and i believ him to be propos 
unimpeach motiv. i, for my part, wish that i could give him 
vote. but i am constrain to take a view of the case which give 
preponder to mr. farebroth’s claim. he is an amiabl man, 
abl preacher, and ha been longer among us.”

old mr. powderel look on, sad and silent. mr. plymdal settl 
cravat, uneasili.

“you don’t set up farebroth as a pattern of what a clergyman ought 
be, i hope,” said mr. larcher, the emin carrier, who had just 
in. “i have no ill-will toward him, but i think we ow someth 
the public, not to speak of anyth higher, in these appoint. 
my opinion farebroth is too lax for a clergyman. i don’t wish 
bring up particular against him; but he will make a littl 
here go as far as he can.”

“and a devilish deal better than too much,” said mr. hawlei, whose 
languag wa notori in that part of the counti. “sick peopl can’
bear so much prai and preach. and that methodist sort 
religion is bad for the spirit—bad for the insid, eh?” he ad,
turn quickli round to the four medic men who were assembl.

but ani answer wa dispens with by the entranc of three gentlemen,
with whom there were greet more or less cordial. these were 
reverend edward thesig, rector of st. peter’s, mr. bulstrod, and 
friend mr. brook of tipton, who had late allow himself to be 
on the board of director in hi turn, but had never befor attend,
hi attend now be due to mr. bulstrod’s exert. lydgat 
the onli person still expect.

everi on now sat down, mr. bulstrod presid, pale 
self-restrain as usual. mr. thesig, a moder evangel, 
for the appoint of hi friend mr. tyke, a zealou abl man, who,
offici at a chapel of eas, had not a cure of soul too 
to leav him ampl time for the new duti. it wa desir 
chaplainci of thi kind should be enter on with a 
intent: thei were peculiar opportun for spiritu influenc;
and while it wa good that a salari should be allot, there wa 
more need for scrupul watch lest the offic should be 
into a mere question of salari. mr. thesig’s manner had so much 
proprieti that objector could onli simmer in silenc.

mr. brook believ that everybodi meant well in the matter. he had 
himself attend to the affair of the infirmari, though he had 
strong interest in whatev wa for the benefit of middlemarch, and 
most happi to meet the gentlemen present on ani public question—“
public question, you know,” mr. brook repeat, with hi nod 
perfect understand. “i am a good deal occupi as a magistr, 
in the collect of documentari evid, but i regard my time 
be at the dispos of the public—and, in short, my friend 
convinc me that a chaplain with a salari—a salari, you know—is a 
good thing, and i am happi to be abl to come here and vote for 
appoint of mr. tyke, who, i understand, is an unexception man,
apostol and eloqu and everyth of that kind—and i am the 
man to withhold my vote—under the circumst, you know.”

“it seem to me that you have been cram with on side of 
question, mr. brook,” said mr. frank hawlei, who wa afraid of nobodi,
and wa a tori suspici of election intent. “you don’t 
to know that on of the worthiest men we have ha been do duti 
chaplain here for year without pai, and that mr. tyke is propos 
supersed him.”

“excus me, mr. hawlei,” said mr. bulstrod. “mr. brook ha been 
inform of mr. farebroth’s charact and posit.”

“by hi enemi,” flash out mr. hawlei.

“i trust there is no person hostil concern here,” said mr.
thesig.

“i’ll swear there is, though,” retort mr. hawlei.

“gentlemen,” said mr. bulstrod, in a subdu tone, “the merit of 
question mai be veri briefli state, and if ani on present doubt 
everi gentleman who is about to give hi vote ha not been 
inform, i can now recapitul the consider that should 
on either side.”

“i don’t see the good of that,” said mr. hawlei. “i suppos we all 
whom we mean to vote for. ani man who want to do justic doe not 
till the last minut to hear both side of the question. i have no 
to lose, and i propos that the matter be put to the vote at onc.”

a brief but still hot discuss follow befor each person 
“tyke” or “farebroth” on a piec of paper and slip it into a 
tumbler; and in the mean time mr. bulstrod saw lydgat enter.

“i perceiv that the vote ar equal divid at present,” said mr.
bulstrod, in a clear bite voic. then, look up at lydgat—

“there is a cast-vote still to be given. it is your, mr. lydgat:
will you be good enough to write?”

“the thing is settl now,” said mr. wrench, rise. “we all know 
mr. lydgat will vote.”

“you seem to speak with some peculiar mean, sir,” said lydgat,
rather defiantli, and keep hi pencil suspend.

“i mere mean that you ar expect to vote with mr. bulstrod. do 
regard that mean as offens?”

“it mai be offens to other. but i shall not desist from vote 
him on that account.” lydgat immedi wrote down “tyke.”

so the rev. walter tyke becam chaplain to the infirmari, and 
continu to work with mr. bulstrod. he wa realli uncertain 
tyke were not the more suitabl candid, and yet hi 
told him that if he had been quit free from indirect bia he 
have vote for mr. farebroth. the affair of the chaplainci remain 
sore point in hi memori as a case in which thi petti medium 
middlemarch had been too strong for him. how could a man be 
with a decis between such altern and under such circumst?
no more than he can be satisfi with hi hat, which he ha chosen 
among such shape as the resourc of the ag offer him, wear it 
best with a resign which is chiefli support by comparison.

but mr. farebroth met him with the same friendli as befor. 
charact of the publican and sinner is not alwai 
incompat with that of the modern pharise, for the major of 
scarc see more distinctli the faulti of our own conduct than 
faulti of our own argument, or the dul of our own joke. 
the vicar of st. botolph’s had certainli escap the slightest 
of the pharise, and by dint of admit to himself that he wa 
much as other men were, he had becom remark unlik them 
thi—that he could excus other for think slightli of him, 
could judg imparti of their conduct even when it told against him.

“the world ha been too strong for _me_, i know,” he said on dai 
lydgat. “but then i am not a mighti man—i shall never be a man 
renown. the choic of hercul is a pretti fabl; but prodicu make 
easi work for the hero, as if the first resolv were enough. 
stori sai that he came to hold the distaff, and at last wore 
nessu shirt. i suppos on good resolv might keep a man right 
everybodi els’s resolv help him.”

the vicar’s talk wa not alwai inspirit: he had escap be 
pharise, but he had not escap that low estim of 
which we rather hastili arriv at as an infer from our own failur.
lydgat thought that there wa a pitiabl infirm of will in mr.
farebroth.




chapter xix.

“l’ altra vedet ch’ha fatto alla 
della sua palma, sospirando, letto.”
—_purgatorio_, vii.


when georg the fourth wa still reign over the privaci 
windsor, when the duke of wellington wa prime minist, and mr. 
wa mayor of the old corpor in middlemarch, mr. casaubon, 
dorothea brook, had taken her wed journei to rome. in those 
the world in gener wa more ignor of good and evil by forti 
than it is at present. travel did not often carri full 
on christian art either in their head or their pocket; and even 
most brilliant english critic of the dai mistook the flower-
tomb of the ascend virgin for an ornament vase due to the painter’
fanci. romantic, which ha help to fill some dull blank with 
and knowledg, had not yet penetr the time with it leaven 
enter into everybodi’s food; it wa ferment still as 
distinguish vigor enthusiasm in certain long-hair 
artist at rome, and the youth of other nation who work or 
near them were sometim caught in the spread movement.

on fine morn a young man whose hair wa not immoder long, 
abund and curli, and who wa otherwis english in hi equip, 
just turn hi back on the belveder torso in the vatican and 
look out on the magnific view of the mountain from the 
round vestibul. he wa suffici absorb not to notic 
approach of a dark-ei, anim german who came up to him and 
a hand on hi shoulder, said with a strong accent, “come here, quick!
els she will have chang her pose.”

quick wa readi at the call, and the two figur pass 
along by the meleag, toward the hall where the reclin ariadn,
then call the cleopatra, li in the marbl voluptu of 
beauti, the draperi fold around her with a petal-like eas 
tender. thei were just in time to see anoth figur 
against a pedest near the reclin marbl: a breath 
girl, whose form, not shame by the ariadn, wa clad in quakerish 
draperi; her long cloak, fasten at the neck, wa thrown backward 
her arm, and on beauti unglov hand pillow her cheek, 
somewhat backward the white beaver bonnet which made a sort of halo 
her face around the simpli braid dark-brown hair. she wa not 
at the sculptur, probabl not think of it: her larg ey 
fix dreamili on a streak of sunlight which fell across the floor. 
she becam consciou of the two stranger who suddenli paus as if 
contempl the cleopatra, and, without look at them, 
turn awai to join a maid-servant and courier who were loiter 
the hall at a littl distanc off.

“what do you think of that for a fine bit of antithesi?” said 
german, search in hi friend’s face for respond admir, 
go on volubl without wait for ani other answer. “there 
antiqu beauti, not corps-like even in death, but arrest in 
complet content of it sensuou perfect: and here stand 
in it breath life, with the conscious of christian centuri 
it bosom. but she should be dress as a nun; i think she look 
what you call a quaker; i would dress her as a nun in my pictur.
howev, she is marri; i saw her wed-ring on that wonder 
hand, otherwis i should have thought the sallow _geistlich_ wa 
father. i saw him part from her a good while ago, and just now 
found her in that magnific pose. onli think! he is perhap rich, 
would like to have her portrait taken. ah! it is no us look 
her—there she goe! let us follow her home!”

“no, no,” said hi companion, with a littl frown.

“you ar singular, ladislaw. you look struck togeth. do you 
her?”

“i know that she is marri to my cousin,” said will ladislaw,
saunter down the hall with a preoccupi air, while hi 
friend kept at hi side and watch him eagerli.

“what! the _geistlich_? he look more like an uncl—a more 
sort of relat.”

“he is not my uncl. i tell you he is my second cousin,” said ladislaw,
with some irrit.

“schön, schön. don’t be snappish. you ar not angri with me 
think mr. second-cousin the most perfect young madonna i ever saw?”

“angri? nonsens. i have onli seen her onc befor, for a coupl 
minut, when my cousin introduc her to me, just befor i 
england. thei were not marri then. i didn’t know thei were come 
rome.”

“but you will go to see them now—you will find out what thei have 
an address—sinc you know the name. shall we go to the post? and 
could speak about the portrait.”

“confound you, naumann! i don’t know what i shall do. i am not 
brazen as you.”

“bah! that is becaus you ar dilettantish and amateurish. if you 
an artist, you would think of mistress second-cousin as antiqu 
anim by christian sentiment—a sort of christian antigon—
forc control by spiritu passion.”

“ye, and that your paint her wa the chief outcom of 
exist—the divin pass into higher complet and all 
exhaust in the act of cover your bit of canva. i am amateurish 
you like: i do _not_ think that all the univers is strain 
the obscur signific of your pictur.”

“but it is, my dear!—so far as it is strain through me, 
naumann: that stand firm,” said the good-natur painter, put 
hand on ladislaw’s shoulder, and not in the least disturb by 
unaccount touch of ill-humor in hi tone. “see now! my 
presuppos the exist of the whole univers—doe it _not?_ and 
function is to paint—and as a painter i have a concept which 
altogeth _genialisch_, of your great-aunt or second grandmoth as 
subject for a pictur; therefor, the univers is strain 
that pictur through that particular hook or claw which it put 
in the shape of me—not true?”

“but how if anoth claw in the shape of me is strain to 
it?—the case is a littl less simpl then.”

“not at all: the result of the struggl is the same thing—pictur or 
pictur—logic.”

will could not resist thi imperturb temper, and the cloud in 
face broke into sunshini laughter.

“come now, my friend—you will help?” said naumann, in a hope tone.

“no; nonsens, naumann! english ladi ar not at everybodi’s 
as model. and you want to express too much with your paint. 
would onli have made a better or wors portrait with a background 
everi connoisseur would give a differ reason for or against. 
what is a portrait of a woman? your paint and plastik ar poor 
after all. thei perturb and dull concept instead of rais them.
languag is a finer medium.”

“ye, for those who can’t paint,” said naumann. “there you have 
right. i did not recommend you to paint, my friend.”

the amiabl artist carri hi sting, but ladislaw did not choos 
appear stung. he went on as if he had not heard.

“languag give a fuller imag, which is all the better for 
vagu. after all, the true see is within; and paint stare at 
with an insist imperfect. i feel that especi 
represent of women. as if a woman were a mere 
superfici! you must wait for movement and tone. there is a 
in their veri breath: thei chang from moment to moment.—thi 
whom you have just seen, for exampl: how would you paint her voic,
prai? but her voic is much divin than anyth you have seen 
her.”

“i see, i see. you ar jealou. no man must presum to think that 
can paint your ideal. thi is seriou, my friend! your great-aunt! ‘
neff al onkel’ in a tragic sens—_ungeheu!_”

“you and i shall quarrel, naumann, if you call that ladi my 
again.”

“how is she to be call then?”

“mr. casaubon.”

“good. suppos i get acquaint with her in spite of you, and find 
she veri much wish to be paint?”

“ye, suppos!” said will ladislaw, in a contemptu underton,
intend to dismiss the subject. he wa consciou of be irrit 
ridicul small caus, which were half of hi own creation. why 
he make ani fuss about mr. casaubon? and yet he felt as if 
had happen to him with regard to her. there ar charact which 
continu creat collis and node for themselv in 
which nobodi is prepar to act with them. their suscept 
clash against object that remain innoc quiet.




chapter xx.

“a child forsaken, wake suddenli,
whose gaze afeard on all thing round doth rove,
and seeth onli that it cannot 
    the meet ey of love.”


two hour later, dorothea wa seat in an inner room or boudoir of 
handsom apart in the via sistina.

i am sorri to add that she wa sob bitterli, with such 
to thi relief of an oppress heart as a woman habitu 
by pride on her own account and thought for other 
sometim allow herself when she feel secur alon. and mr. 
wa certain to remain awai for some time at the vatican.

yet dorothea had no distinctli shapen grievanc that she could 
even to herself; and in the midst of her confus thought and passion,
the mental act that wa struggl forth into clear wa 
self-accus cry that her feel of desol wa the fault of 
own spiritu poverti. she had marri the man of her choic, and 
the advantag over most girl that she had contempl her 
chiefli as the begin of new duti: from the veri first she 
thought of mr. casaubon as have a mind so much abov her own, that 
must often be claim by studi which she could not entir share;
moreov, after the brief narrow experi of her girlhood she 
behold rome, the citi of visibl histori, where the past of a 
hemispher seem move in funer process with strang 
imag and trophi gather from afar.

but thi stupend fragmentari heighten the 
strang of her bridal life. dorothea had now been five week 
rome, and in the kindli morn when autumn and winter seem to 
hand in hand like a happi ag coupl on of whom would 
surviv in chiller loneli, she had driven about at first with mr.
casaubon, but of late chiefli with tantripp and their 
courier. she had been led through the best galleri, had been taken 
the chief point of view, had been shown the grandest ruin and 
most gloriou church, and she had end by oftenest choos to 
out to the campagna where she could feel alon with the earth and sky,
awai-from the oppress masquerad of ag, in which her own life 
seem to becom a masqu with enigmat costum.

to those who have look at rome with the quicken power of 
knowledg which breath a grow soul into all histor shape, 
trace out the suppress transit which unit all contrast, 
mai still be the spiritu centr and interpret of the world. but 
them conceiv on more histor contrast: the gigant 
revel of that imperi and papal citi thrust abruptli on 
notion of a girl who had been brought up in english and 
puritan, fed on meagr protest histori and on art chiefli 
the hand-screen sort; a girl whose ardent natur turn all her 
allow of knowledg into principl, fuse her action into 
mould, and whose quick emot gave the most abstract thing 
qualiti of a pleasur or a pain; a girl who had late becom a wife,
and from the enthusiast accept of untri duti found 
plung in tumultu preoccup with her person lot. the 
of unintellig rome might lie easili on bright nymph to whom 
form a background for the brilliant picnic of anglo-foreign societi;
but dorothea had no such defenc against deep impress. ruin 
basilica, palac and colossi, set in the midst of a sordid present,
where all that wa live and warm-blood seem sunk in the 
degeneraci of a superstit divorc from rever; the dimmer 
yet eager titan life gaze and struggl on wall and ceil; 
long vista of white form whose marbl ey seem to hold 
monoton light of an alien world: all thi vast wreck of 
ideal, sensuou and spiritu, mix confusedli with the sign 
breath forget and degrad, at first jar her as with 
electr shock, and then urg themselv on her with that 
belong to a glut of confus idea which check the flow of emot.
form both pale and glow took possess of her young sens, 
fix themselv in her memori even when she wa not think of them,
prepar strang associ which remain through her after-year.
our mood ar apt to bring with them imag which succe each 
like the magic-lantern pictur of a doze; and in certain state 
dull forlorn dorothea all her life continu to see the vast 
st. peter’s, the huge bronz canopi, the excit intent in 
attitud and garment of the prophet and evangelist in the 
abov, and the red draperi which wa be hung for christma 
itself everywher like a diseas of the retina.

not that thi inward amaz of dorothea’s wa anyth 
except: mani soul in their young nuditi ar tumbl out 
incongru and left to “find their feet” among them, while 
elder go about their busi. nor can i suppos that when mr.
casaubon is discov in a fit of weep six week after her wed,
the situat will be regard as tragic. some discourag, 
faint of heart at the new real futur which replac the imaginari,
is not unusu, and we do not expect peopl to be deepli move by 
is not unusu. that element of tragedi which li in the veri fact 
frequenc, ha not yet wrought itself into the coars emot 
mankind; and perhap our frame could hardli bear much of it. if we 
a keen vision and feel of all ordinari human life, it would be 
hear the grass grow and the squirrel’s heart beat, and we should 
of that roar which li on the other side of silenc. as it is, 
quickest of us walk about well wad with stupid.

howev, dorothea wa cry, and if she had been requir to state 
caus, she could onli have done so in some such gener word as i 
alreadi us: to have been driven to be more particular would have 
like try to give a histori of the light and shadow, for that 
real futur which wa replac the imaginari drew it materi 
the endless minutia by which her view of mr. casaubon and her 
relat, now that she wa marri to him, wa gradual chang 
the secret motion of a watch-hand from what it had been in her 
dream. it wa too earli yet for her fulli to recogn or at 
admit the chang, still more for her to have readjust 
devoted which wa so necessari a part of her mental life that 
wa almost sure sooner or later to recov it. perman rebellion, 
disord of a life without some love rever resolv, wa 
possibl to her; but she wa now in an interv when the veri forc 
her natur heighten it confus. in thi wai, the earli month 
marriag often ar time of critic tumult—whether that of 
shrimp-pool or of deeper water—which afterward subsid into 
peac.

but wa not mr. casaubon just as learn as befor? had hi form 
express chang, or hi sentiment becom less laudabl? 
wayward of womanhood! did hi chronolog fail him, or hi 
to state not onli a theori but the name of those who held it; or 
provis for give the head of ani subject on demand? and wa 
rome the place in all the world to give free plai to 
accomplish? besid, had not dorothea’s enthusiasm 
dwelt on the prospect of reliev the weight and perhap the 
with which great task lie on him who ha to achiev them?— and 
such weight press on mr. casaubon wa onli plainer than befor.

all these ar crush question; but whatev els remain the same,
the light had chang, and you cannot find the pearli dawn at noondai.
the fact is unalter, that a fellow-mortal with whose natur you 
acquaint sole through the brief entranc and exit of a 
imagin week call courtship, mai, when seen in the continu 
marri companionship, be disclos as someth better or wors 
what you have preconceiv, but will certainli not appear 
the same. and it would be astonish to find how soon the chang 
felt if we had no kindr chang to compar with it. to share 
with a brilliant dinner-companion, or to see your favorit 
in the ministri, mai bring about chang quit as rapid: in these 
too we begin by know littl and believ much, and we sometim 
by invert the quantiti.

still, such comparison might mislead, for no man wa more incap 
flashi make-believ than mr. casaubon: he wa as genuin a charact 
ani rumin anim, and he had not activ assist in creat 
illus about himself. how wa it that in the week sinc 
marriag, dorothea had not distinctli observ but felt with a 
depress, that the larg vista and wide fresh air which she 
dream of find in her husband’s mind were replac by anteroom 
wind passag which seem to lead nowhith? i suppos it wa 
in courtship everyth is regard as provision and preliminari, 
the smallest sampl of virtu or accomplish is taken to 
delight store which the broad leisur of marriag will reveal. 
the door-sill of marriag onc cross, expect is concentr 
the present. have onc embark on your marit voyag, it 
imposs not to be awar that you make no wai and that the sea is 
within sight—that, in fact, you ar explor an enclos basin.

in their convers befor marriag, mr. casaubon had often dwelt 
some explan or question detail of which dorothea did not 
the bear; but such imperfect coher seem due to the 
of their intercours, and, support by her faith in their futur, 
had listen with fervid patienc to a recit of possibl 
to be brought against mr. casaubon’s entir new view of 
philistin god dagon and other fish-deiti, think that 
she should see thi subject which touch him so nearli from the 
high ground whenc doubtless it had becom so import to him. again,
the matter-of-cours statement and tone of dismiss with which 
treat what to her were the most stir thought, wa 
account for as belong to the sens of hast and preoccup 
which she herself share dure their engag. but now, sinc 
had been in rome, with all the depth of her emot rous 
tumultu activ, and with life made a new problem by new element,
she had been becom more and more awar, with a certain terror, 
her mind wa continu slide into inward fit of anger 
repuls, or els into forlorn weari. how far the judici 
or ani other hero of erudit would have been the same at mr.
casaubon’s time of life, she had no mean of know, so that he 
not have the advantag of comparison; but her husband’s wai 
comment on the strang impress object around them had begun 
affect her with a sort of mental shiver: he had perhap the 
intent of acquit himself worthili, but onli of 
himself. what wa fresh to her mind wa worn out to hi; and 
capac of thought and feel as had ever been stimul in him 
the gener life of mankind had long shrunk to a sort of 
prepar, a lifeless embalm of knowledg.

when he said, “doe thi interest you, dorothea? shall we stai a 
longer? i am readi to stai if you wish it,”—it seem to her as 
go or stai were alik dreari. or, “should you like to go to 
farnesina, dorothea? it contain celebr fresco design or 
by raphael, which most person think it worth while to visit.”

“but do you care about them?” wa alwai dorothea’s question.

“thei ar, i believ, highli esteem. some of them repres the 
of cupid and psych, which is probabl the romant invent of 
literari period, and cannot, i think, be reckon as a genuin 
product. but if you like these wall-paint we can easili 
thither; and you will then, i think, have seen the chief work 
raphael, ani of which it were a piti to omit in a visit to rome. he 
the painter who ha been held to combin the most complet grace 
form with sublim of express. such at least i have gather to 
the opinion of cognoscenti.”

thi kind of answer given in a measur offici tone, as of 
clergyman read accord to the rubric, did not help to justifi 
glori of the etern citi, or to give her the hope that if she 
more about them the world would be joyous illumin for her. 
is hardli ani contact more depress to a young ardent creatur 
that of a mind in which year full of knowledg seem to have issu 
a blank absenc of interest or sympathi.

on other subject inde mr. casaubon show a tenac of 
and an eager which ar usual regard as the effect 
enthusiasm, and dorothea wa anxiou to follow thi 
direct of hi thought, instead of be made to feel that 
drag him awai from it. but she wa gradual ceas to expect 
her former delight confid that she should see ani wide 
where she follow him. poor mr. casaubon himself wa lost among 
closet and wind stair, and in an agit dim about 
cabeiri, or in an exposur of other mythologist’ ill-
parallel, easili lost sight of ani purpos which had prompt him 
these labor. with hi taper stuck befor him he forgot the absenc 
window, and in bitter manuscript remark on other men’s notion 
the solar deiti, he had becom indiffer to the sunlight.

these characterist, fix and unchang as bone in mr. casaubon,
might have remain longer unfelt by dorothea if she had 
encourag to pour forth her girlish and womanli feel—if he 
have held her hand between hi and listen with the delight 
tender and understand to all the littl histori which made 
her experi, and would have given her the same sort of intimaci 
return, so that the past life of each could be includ in their 
knowledg and affect—or if she could have fed her affect 
those childlik caress which ar the bent of everi sweet woman, 
ha begun by shower kiss on the hard pate of her bald doll,
creat a happi soul within that wooden from the wealth of her 
love. that wa dorothea’s bent. with all her yearn to know what 
afar from her and to be wide benign, she had ardor enough for 
wa near, to have kiss mr. casaubon’s coat-sleev, or to 
caress hi shoe-latchet, if he would have made ani other sign 
accept than pronounc her, with hi unfail proprieti, to be 
a most affection and truli feminin natur, indic at the 
time by polit reach a chair for her that he regard 
manifest as rather crude and startl. have made hi 
toilet with due care in the morn, he wa prepar onli for 
amen of life which were suit to the well-adjust stiff 
of the period, and to a mind weight with unpublish matter.

and by a sad contradict dorothea’s idea and resolv seem 
melt ic float and lost in the warm flood of which thei had 
but anoth form. she wa humili to find herself a mere victim 
feel, as if she could know noth except through that medium: 
her strength wa scatter in fit of agit, of struggl, 
despond, and then again in vision of more complet renunci,
transform all hard condit into duti. poor dorothea! she 
certainli troublesom—to herself chiefli; but thi morn for 
first time she had been troublesom to mr. casaubon.

she had begun, while thei were take coffe, with a determin 
shake off what she inwardli call her selfish, and turn a 
all cheer attent to her husband when he said, “my dear dorothea,
we must now think of all that is yet left undon, as a preliminari 
our departur. i would fain have return home earlier that we 
have been at lowick for the christma; but my inquiri here have 
protract beyond their anticip period. i trust, howev, that 
time here ha not been pass unpleasantli to you. among the sight 
europ, that of rome ha ever been held on of the most strike and 
some respect edifi. i well rememb that i consid it an 
in my life when i visit it for the first time; after the fall 
napoleon, an event which open the contin to travel. inde 
think it is on among sever citi to which an extrem hyperbol 
been appli—‘see rome and die:’ but in your case i would propos 
emend and sai, see rome as a bride, and live henceforth as a 
wife.”

mr. casaubon pronounc thi littl speech with the most 
intent, blink a littl and swai hi head up and down, 
conclud with a smile. he had not found marriag a raptur state,
but he had no idea of be anyth els than an 
husband, who would make a charm young woman as happi as she 
to be.

“i hope you ar thoroughli satisfi with our stai—i mean, with 
result so far as your studi ar concern,” said dorothea, try 
keep her mind fix on what most affect her husband.

“ye,” said mr. casaubon, with that peculiar pitch of voic which 
the word half a neg. “i have been led farther than i had foreseen,
and variou subject for annot have present themselv which,
though i have no direct need of them, i could not pretermit. the task,
notwithstand the assist of my amanuensi, ha been a 
labori on, but your societi ha happili prevent me from that 
continu prosecut of thought beyond the hour of studi which 
been the snare of my solitari life.”

“i am veri glad that my presenc ha made ani differ to you,” 
dorothea, who had a vivid memori of even in which she had 
that mr. casaubon’s mind had gone too deep dure the dai to be abl 
get to the surfac again. i fear there wa a littl temper in 
repli. “i hope when we get to lowick, i shall be more us to you,
and be abl to enter a littl more into what interest you.”

“doubtless, my dear,” said mr. casaubon, with a slight bow. “the 
i have here made will want sift, and you can, if you pleas, 
them under my direct.”

“and all your note,” said dorothea, whose heart had alreadi 
within her on thi subject, so that now she could not help 
with her tongu. “all those row of volum—will you not now do 
you us to speak of?—will you not make up your mind what part of 
you will us, and begin to write the book which will make your 
knowledg us to the world? i will write to your dictat, or 
will copi and extract what you tell me: i can be of no other us.”
dorothea, in a most unaccount, darkli feminin manner, end with 
slight sob and ey full of tear.

the excess feel manifest would alon have been 
disturb to mr. casaubon, but there were other reason why dorothea’
word were among the most cut and irrit to him that she 
have been impel to us. she wa as blind to hi inward troubl 
he to her: she had not yet learn those hidden conflict in 
husband which claim our piti. she had not yet listen patient to 
heartbeat, but onli felt that her own wa beat violent. in mr.
casaubon’s ear, dorothea’s voic gave loud emphat iter to 
muffl suggest of conscious which it wa possibl to 
as mere fanci, the illus of exagger sensit: alwai 
such suggest ar unmistak repeat from without, thei 
resist as cruel and unjust. we ar anger even by the 
accept of our humili confess—how much more by hear 
hard distinct syllabl from the lip of a near observ, 
confus murmur which we try to call morbid, and strive against as 
thei were the oncom of numb! and thi cruel outward accus 
there in the shape of a wife—nai, of a young bride, who, instead 
observ hi abund pen-scratch and amplitud of paper with 
uncrit aw of an eleg-mind canari-bird, seem to 
herself as a spy watch everyth with a malign power of infer.
here, toward thi particular point of the compass, mr. casaubon had 
sensit to match dorothea’s, and an equal quick to 
more than the fact. he had formerli observ with approb 
capac for worship the right object; he now foresaw with 
terror that thi capac might be replac by presumpt, 
worship by the most exasper of all critic,—that which 
vagu a great mani fine end, and ha not the least notion what 
cost to reach them.

for the first time sinc dorothea had known him, mr. casaubon’s 
had a quick angri flush upon it.

“my love,” he said, with irrit rein in by proprieti, “you 
reli upon me for know the time and the season, adapt to 
differ stage of a work which is not to be measur by the 
conjectur of ignor onlook. it had been easi for me to gain 
temporari effect by a mirag of baseless opinion; but it is ever 
trial of the scrupul explor to be salut with the impati 
of chatter who attempt onli the smallest achiev, be 
equip for no other. and it were well if all such could be 
to discrimin judgment of which the true subject-matter 
entir beyond their reach, from those of which the element mai 
compass by a narrow and superfici survei.”

thi speech wa deliv with an energi and readi quit 
with mr. casaubon. it wa not inde entir an improvis, but 
taken shape in inward colloqui, and rush out like the round 
from a fruit when sudden heat crack it. dorothea wa not onli 
wife: she wa a personif of that shallow world which 
the appreci or despond author.

dorothea wa indign in her turn. had she not been 
everyth in herself except the desir to enter into some 
with her husband’s chief interest?

“my judgment _wa_ a veri superfici on—such as i am capabl 
form,” she answer, with a prompt resent, that need 
rehears. “you show me the row of notebook—you have often 
of them—you have often said that thei want digest. but i 
heard you speak of the write that is to be publish. those were 
simpl fact, and my judgment went no farther. i onli beg you to 
me be of some good to you.”

dorothea rose to leav the tabl and mr. casaubon made no repli, 
up a letter which lai besid him as if to reperus it. both 
shock at their mutual situat—that each should have betrai 
toward the other. if thei had been at home, settl at lowick 
ordinari life among their neighbor, the clash would have been 
embarrass: but on a wed journei, the express object of which 
to isol two peopl on the ground that thei ar all the world to 
other, the sens of disagr is, to sai the least, confound 
stultifi. to have chang your longitud extens and 
yourselv in a moral solitud in order to have small explos, 
find convers difficult and to hand a glass of water 
look, can hardli be regard as satisfactori fulfil even to 
toughest mind. to dorothea’s inexperienc sensit, it 
like a catastroph, chang all prospect; and to mr. casaubon it 
a new pain, he never have been on a wed journei befor, or 
himself in that close union which wa more of a subject than he 
been abl to imagin, sinc thi charm young bride not onli 
him to much consider on her behalf (which he had 
given), but turn out to be capabl of agit him cruelli 
where he most need sooth. instead of get a soft fenc 
the cold, shadowi, unapplaus audienc of hi life, had he onli 
it a more substanti presenc?

neither of them felt it possibl to speak again at present. to 
revers a previou arrang and declin to go out would have 
a show of persist anger which dorothea’s conscienc shrank from,
see that she alreadi began to feel herself guilti. howev just 
indign might be, her ideal wa not to claim justic, but to 
tender. so when the carriag came to the door, she drove with mr.
casaubon to the vatican, walk with him through the stoni avenu 
inscript, and when she part with him at the entranc to 
librari, went on through the museum out of mere listless as to 
wa around her. she had not spirit to turn round and sai that she 
drive anywher. it wa when mr. casaubon wa quit her that 
had first seen her, and he had enter the long galleri of sculptur 
the same time with her; but here naumann had to await ladislaw 
whom he wa to settl a bet of champagn about an 
mediaev-look figur there. after thei had examin the figur, 
had walk on finish their disput, thei had part, 
linger behind while naumann had gone into the hall of statu 
he again saw dorothea, and saw her in that brood abstract 
made her pose remark. she did not realli see the streak of 
on the floor more than she saw the statu: she wa inwardli see 
light of year to come in her own home and over the english field 
elm and hedg-border highroad; and feel that the wai in 
thei might be fill with joy devoted wa not so clear to her 
it had been. but in dorothea’s mind there wa a current into which 
thought and feel were apt sooner or later to flow—the 
forward of the whole conscious toward the fullest truth, the 
partial good. there wa clearli someth better than anger 
despond.




chapter xxi.

“hire facound ek full womanli and plain,
no contrefet term had 
to semen wise.”
—chaucer.


it wa in that wai dorothea came to be sob as soon as she 
secur alon. but she wa present rous by a knock at the door,
which made her hastili dry her ey befor sai, “come in.” 
had brought a card, and said that there wa a gentleman wait in 
lobbi. the courier had told him that onli mr. casaubon wa at home,
but he said he wa a relat of mr. casaubon’s: would she see him?

“ye,” said dorothea, without paus; “show him into the salon.” 
chief impress about young ladislaw were that when she had seen 
at lowick she had been made awar of mr. casaubon’s generos 
him, and also that she had been interest in hi own hesit 
hi career. she wa aliv to anyth that gave her an opportun 
activ sympathi, and at thi moment it seem as if the visit had 
to shake her out of her self-absorb discont—to remind her of 
husband’s good, and make her feel that she had now the right to 
hi helpmat in all kind deed. she wait a minut or two, but 
she pass into the next room there were just sign enough that she 
been cry to make her open face look more youth and appeal 
usual. she met ladislaw with that exquisit smile of good-will which 
unmix with vaniti, and held out her hand to him. he wa the elder 
sever year, but at that moment he look much the younger, for 
transpar complexion flush suddenli, and he spoke with a 
extrem unlik the readi indiffer of hi manner with hi 
companion, while dorothea becam all the calmer with a wonder 
to put him at eas.

“i wa not awar that you and mr. casaubon were in rome, until 
morn, when i saw you in the vatican museum,” he said. “i knew you 
onc—but—i mean, that i conclud mr. casaubon’s address would be 
at the post restant, and i wa anxiou to pai my respect to him 
you as earli as possibl.”

“prai sit down. he is not here now, but he will be glad to hear of you,
i am sure,” said dorothea, seat herself unthinkingli between 
fire and the light of the tall window, and point to a 
opposit, with the quietud of a benign matron. the sign of 
sorrow in her face were onli the more strike. “mr. casaubon is 
engag; but you will leav your address—will you not?—and he 
write to you.”

“you ar veri good,” said ladislaw, begin to lose hi diffid 
the interest with which he wa observ the sign of weep which 
alter her face. “my address is on my card. but if you will allow me 
will call again to-morrow at an hour when mr. casaubon is like to 
at home.”

“he goe to read in the librari of the vatican everi dai, and you 
hardli see him except by an appoint. especi now. we ar 
to leav rome, and he is veri busi. he is usual awai almost 
breakfast till dinner. but i am sure he will wish you to dine with us.”

will ladislaw wa struck mute for a few moment. he had never been 
of mr. casaubon, and if it had not been for the sens of oblig,
would have laugh at him as a bat of erudit. but the idea of 
dri-up pedant, thi elabor of small explan about 
import as the surplu stock of fals antiqu kept in a vendor’
back chamber, have first got thi ador young creatur to 
him, and then pass hi honeymoon awai from her, grope after 
mouldi futil (will wa given to hyperbol)—thi sudden 
stir him with a sort of comic disgust: he wa divid between 
impuls to laugh aloud and the equal unseason impuls to 
into scorn invect.

for an instant he felt that the struggl wa caus a queer 
of hi mobil featur, but with a good effort he resolv it 
noth more offens than a merri smile.

dorothea wonder; but the smile wa irresist, and shone back 
her face too. will ladislaw’s smile wa delight, unless you 
angri with him beforehand: it wa a gush of inward light 
the transpar skin as well as the ey, and plai about everi 
and line as if some ariel were touch them with a new charm, 
banish forev the trace of moodi. the reflect of that 
could not but have a littl merriment in it too, even under 
eyelash still moist, as dorothea said inquiringli, “someth 
you?”

“ye,” said will, quick in find resourc. “i am think of 
sort of figur i cut the first time i saw you, when you annihil 
poor sketch with your critic.”

“my critic?” said dorothea, wonder still more. “sure not. 
alwai feel particularli ignor about paint.”

“i suspect you of know so much, that you knew how to sai just 
wa most cut. you said—i dare sai you don’t rememb it as 
do—that the relat of my sketch to natur wa quit hidden from you.
at least, you impli that.” will could laugh now as well as smile.

“that wa realli my ignor,” said dorothea, admir will’
good-humor. “i must have said so onli becaus i never could see 
beauti in the pictur which my uncl told me all judg thought 
fine. and i have gone about with just the same ignor in rome. 
ar compar few paint that i can realli enjoi. at first 
i enter a room where the wall ar cover with fresco, or with 
pictur, i feel a kind of aw—like a child present at great 
where there ar grand robe and process; i feel myself in 
presenc of some higher life than my own. but when i begin to 
the pictur on by on the life goe out of them, or els is 
violent and strang to me. it must be my own dul. i am see 
much all at onc, and not understand half of it. that alwai 
on feel stupid. it is pain to be told that anyth is veri 
and not be abl to feel that it is fine—someth like be blind,
while peopl talk of the sky.”

“oh, there is a great deal in the feel for art which must 
acquir,” said will. (it wa imposs now to doubt the direct 
dorothea’s confess.) “art is an old languag with a great 
artifici affect style, and sometim the chief pleasur on 
out of know them is the mere sens of know. i enjoi the art 
all sort here immens; but i suppos if i could pick my enjoy 
piec i should find it made up of mani differ thread. there 
someth in daub a littl on’s self, and have an idea of 
process.”

“you mean perhap to be a painter?” said dorothea, with a new 
of interest. “you mean to make paint your profess? mr. 
will like to hear that you have chosen a profess.”

“no, oh no,” said will, with some cold. “i have quit made up 
mind against it. it is too on-side a life. i have been see a 
deal of the german artist here: i travel from frankfort with on 
them. some ar fine, even brilliant fellow—but i should not like 
get into their wai of look at the world entir from the 
point of view.”

“that i can understand,” said dorothea, cordial. “and in rome 
seem as if there were so mani thing which ar more want in 
world than pictur. but if you have a geniu for paint, would 
not be right to take that as a guid? perhap you might do 
thing than these—or differ, so that there might not be so 
pictur almost all alik in the same place.”

there wa no mistak thi simplic, and will wa won by it 
frank. “a man must have a veri rare geniu to make chang of 
sort. i am afraid mine would not carri me even to the pitch of 
well what ha been done alreadi, at least not so well as to make 
worth while. and i should never succe in anyth by dint 
drudgeri. if thing don’t come easili to me i never get them.”

“i have heard mr. casaubon sai that he regret your want of patienc,”
said dorothea, gentli. she wa rather shock at thi mode of 
all life as a holidai.

“ye, i know mr. casaubon’s opinion. he and i differ.”

the slight streak of contempt in thi hasti repli offend dorothea.
she wa all the more suscept about mr. casaubon becaus of 
morn’s troubl.

“certainli you differ,” she said, rather proudli. “i did not think 
compar you: such power of persev devot labor as mr.
casaubon’s is not common.”

will saw that she wa offend, but thi onli gave an 
impuls to the new irrit of hi latent dislik toward mr.
casaubon. it wa too intoler that dorothea should be 
thi husband: such weak in a woman is pleasant to no man but 
husband in question. mortal ar easili tempt to pinch the life 
of their neighbor’s buzz glori, and think that such kill is 
murder.

“no, inde,” he answer, promptli. “and therefor it is a piti 
it should be thrown awai, as so much english scholarship is, for 
of know what is be done by the rest of the world. if mr. 
read german he would save himself a great deal of troubl.”

“i do not understand you,” said dorothea, startl and anxiou.

“i mere mean,” said will, in an offhand wai, “that the german 
taken the lead in histor inquiri, and thei laugh at result 
ar got by grope about in wood with a pocket-compass while thei 
made good road. when i wa with mr. casaubon i saw that he 
himself in that direct: it wa almost against hi will that he 
a latin treatis written by a german. i wa veri sorri.”

will onli thought of give a good pinch that would annihil 
vaunt labori, and wa unabl to imagin the mode in 
dorothea would be wound. young mr. ladislaw wa not at all 
himself in german writer; but veri littl achiev is requir 
order to piti anoth man’s shortcom.

poor dorothea felt a pang at the thought that the labor of 
husband’s life might be void, which left her no energi to spare for 
question whether thi young rel who wa so much oblig to 
ought not to have repress hi observ. she did not even speak,
but sat look at her hand, absorb in the piteous of 
thought.

will, howev, have given that annihil pinch, wa 
asham, imagin from dorothea’s silenc that he had offend 
still more; and have also a conscienc about pluck 
tail-feather from a benefactor.

“i regret it especi,” he resum, take the usual cours 
detract to insincer eulogi, “becaus of my gratitud and 
toward my cousin. it would not signifi so much in a man whose 
and charact were less distinguish.”

dorothea rais her ey, brighter than usual with excit feel, 
said in her saddest recit, “how i wish i had learn german when 
wa at lausann! there were plenti of german teacher. but now i can 
of no us.”

there wa a new light, but still a mysteri light, for will 
dorothea’s last word. the question how she had come to accept mr.
casaubon—which he had dismiss when he first saw her by sai 
she must be disagre in spite of appear—wa not now to 
answer on ani such short and easi method. whatev els she might be,
she wa not disagre. she wa not coldli clever and 
satir, but ador simpl and full of feel. she wa an 
beguil. it would be a uniqu delight to wait and watch for 
melodi fragment in which her heart and soul came forth so 
and ingenu. the aeolian harp again came into hi mind.

she must have made some origin romanc for herself in thi marriag.
and if mr. casaubon had been a dragon who had carri her off to 
lair with hi talon simpli and without legal form, it would have 
an unavoid feat of heroism to releas her and fall at her feet. 
he wa someth more unmanag than a dragon: he wa a 
with collect societi at hi back, and he wa at that moment 
the room in all the unimpeach correct of hi demeanor, 
dorothea wa look anim with a newli rous alarm and regret, 
will wa look anim with hi admir specul about 
feel.

mr. casaubon felt a surpris which wa quit unmix with pleasur, 
he did not swerv from hi usual polit of greet, when will 
and explain hi presenc. mr. casaubon wa less happi than usual, 
thi perhap made him look all the dimmer and more fade; els, 
effect might easili have been produc by the contrast of hi 
cousin’s appear. the first impress on see will wa on 
sunni bright, which ad to the uncertainti of hi 
express. sure, hi veri featur chang their form, hi 
look sometim larg and sometim small; and the littl rippl 
hi nose wa a prepar for metamorphosi. when he turn hi 
quickli hi hair seem to shake out light, and some person 
thei saw decid geniu in thi corusc. mr. casaubon, on 
contrari, stood rayless.

as dorothea’s ey were turn anxious on her husband she wa 
not insens to the contrast, but it wa onli mingl with 
caus in make her more consciou of that new alarm on hi 
which wa the first stir of a piti tender fed by 
realiti of hi lot and not by her own dream. yet it wa a sourc 
greater freedom to her that will wa there; hi young equal 
agreeabl, and also perhap hi open to convict. she felt 
immens need of some on to speak to, and she had never befor seen 
on who seem so quick and pliabl, so like to 
everyth.

mr. casaubon grave hope that will wa pass hi time profit 
well as pleasantli in rome—had thought hi intent wa to remain 
south germani—but beg him to come and dine to-morrow, when he 
convers more at larg: at present he wa somewhat weari. 
understood, and accept the invit immedi took hi leav.

dorothea’s ey follow her husband anxious, while he sank 
wearili at the end of a sofa, and rest hi elbow support hi 
and look on the floor. a littl flush, and with bright ey, 
seat herself besid him, and said—

“forgiv me for speak so hastili to you thi morn. i wa wrong. 
fear i hurt you and made the dai more burdensom.”

“i am glad that you feel that, my dear,” said mr. casaubon. he 
quietli and bow hi head a littl, but there wa still an 
feel in hi ey as he look at her.

“but you do forgiv me?” said dorothea, with a quick sob. in her 
for some manifest of feel she wa readi to exagger her 
fault. would not love see return penit afar off, and fall on 
neck and kiss it?

“my dear dorothea—‘who with repent is not satisfi, is not 
heaven nor earth:’—you do not think me worthi to be banish by 
sever sentenc,” said mr. casaubon, exert himself to make a 
statement, and also to smile faintli.

dorothea wa silent, but a tear which had come up with the sob 
insist on fall.

“you ar excit, my dear. and i also am feel some 
consequ of too much mental disturb,” said mr. casaubon. 
fact, he had it in hi thought to tell her that she ought not to 
receiv young ladislaw in hi absenc: but he abstain, partli 
the sens that it would be ungraci to bring a new complaint in 
moment of her penit acknowledg, partli becaus he want 
avoid further agit of himself by speech, and partli becaus he 
too proud to betrai that jealousi of disposit which wa not 
exhaust on hi scholarli compeer that there wa none to spare 
other direct. there is a sort of jealousi which need veri 
fire: it is hardli a passion, but a blight bred in the cloudi, 
despond of uneasi egoism.

“i think it is time for us to dress,” he ad, look at hi watch.
thei both rose, and there wa never ani further allus between 
to what had pass on thi dai.

but dorothea rememb it to the last with the vivid with which 
all rememb epoch in our experi when some dear expect di,
or some new motiv is born. todai she had begun to see that she 
been under a wild illus in expect a respons to her feel 
mr. casaubon, and she had felt the wake of a presenti that 
might be a sad conscious in hi life which made as great a need 
hi side as on her own.

we ar all of us born in moral stupid, take the world as an 
to feed our suprem selv: dorothea had earli begun to emerg 
that stupid, but yet it had been easier to her to imagin how 
would devot herself to mr. casaubon, and becom wise and strong in 
strength and wisdom, than to conceiv with that distinct which 
no longer reflect but feel—an idea wrought back to the 
of sens, like the solid of object—that he had an equival 
of self, whenc the light and shadow must alwai fall with a 
differ.




chapter xxii.

“nou câusam longtemp; ell était simpl et bonn.
ne sachant pa le mal, ell faisait le bien;
de richess du coeur ell me fit l’aumôn,
et tout en écoutant comm le coeur se donn,
san oser y penser je lui donnai le mien;
ell emporta ma vie, et n’en sut jamai rien.”
—alfr de musset.


will ladislaw wa delightfulli agreeabl at dinner the next dai, 
gave no opportun for mr. casaubon to show disapprob. on 
contrari it seem to dorothea that will had a happier wai of 
her husband into convers and of deferenti listen to 
than she had ever observ in ani on befor. to be sure, the 
about tipton were not highli gift! will talk a good deal himself,
but what he said wa thrown in with such rapid, and with such 
unimport air of sai someth by the wai, that it seem a 
littl chime after the great bell. if will wa not alwai perfect, 
wa certainli on of hi good dai. he describ touch of 
among the poor peopl in rome, onli to be seen by on who could 
about freeli; he found himself in agreement with mr. casaubon as to 
unsound opinion of middleton concern the relat of judaism 
catholic; and pass easili to a half-enthusiast half-
pictur of the enjoy he got out of the veri miscellan 
rome, which made the mind flexibl with constant comparison, and 
you from see the world’s ag as a set of box-like 
without vital connect. mr. casaubon’s studi, will observ, 
alwai been of too broad a kind for that, and he had perhap never 
ani such sudden effect, but for himself he confess that rome 
given him quit a new sens of histori as a whole: the 
stimul hi imagin and made him construct. 
occasion, but not too often, he appeal to dorothea, and 
what she said, as if her sentiment were an item to be consid in 
final judgment even of the madonna di foligno or the laocoon. a 
of contribut to form the world’s opinion make 
particularli cheer; and mr. casaubon too wa not without hi 
in hi young wife, who spoke better than most women, as inde he 
perceiv in choos her.

sinc thing were go on so pleasantli, mr. casaubon’s statement 
hi labor in the librari would be suspend for a coupl of dai, 
that after a brief renew he should have no further reason for 
in rome, encourag will to urg that mr. casaubon should not go 
without see a studio or two. would not mr. casaubon take her? 
sort of thing ought not to be miss: it wa quit special: it wa 
form of life that grew like a small fresh veget with 
popul of insect on huge fossil. will would be happi to 
them—not to anyth wearisom, onli to a few exampl.

mr. casaubon, see dorothea look earnestli toward him, could not 
ask her if she would be interest in such visit: he wa now at 
servic dure the whole dai; and it wa agre that will should 
on the morrow and drive with them.

will could not omit thorwaldsen, a live celebr about whom even mr.
casaubon inquir, but befor the dai wa far advanc he led the 
to the studio of hi friend adolf naumann, whom he mention as on 
the chief renov of christian art, on of those who had not 
reviv but expand that grand concept of suprem event 
mysteri at which the success ag were spectat, and in 
to which the great soul of all period becam as it 
contemporari. will ad that he had made himself naumann’s pupil 
the nonc.

“i have been make some oil-sketch under him,” said will. “i 
copi. i must put someth of my own in. naumann ha been 
the saint draw the car of the church, and i have been make 
sketch of marlow’s tamburlain drive the conquer king in 
chariot. i am not so ecclesiast as naumann, and i sometim 
him with hi excess of mean. but thi time i mean to outdo him 
breadth of intent. i take tamburlain in hi chariot for 
tremend cours of the world’s physic histori lash on 
har dynasti. in my opinion, that is a good 
interpret.” will here look at mr. casaubon, who receiv 
offhand treatment of symbol veri uneasili, and bow with a 
air.

“the sketch must be veri grand, if it convei so much,” said dorothea.
“i should need some explan even of the mean you give. do 
intend tamburlain to repres earthquak and volcano?”

“oh ye,” said will, laugh, “and migrat of race and 
of forest—and america and the steam-engin. everyth you 
imagin!”

“what a difficult kind of shorthand!” said dorothea, smile 
her husband. “it would requir all your knowledg to be abl to 
it.”

mr. casaubon blink furtiv at will. he had a suspicion that he 
be laugh at. but it wa not possibl to includ dorothea in 
suspicion.

thei found naumann paint industri, but no model wa present;
hi pictur were advantag arrang, and hi own plain 
person set off by a dove-color blous and a maroon velvet cap, 
that everyth wa as fortun as if he had expect the 
young english ladi exactli at that time.

the painter in hi confid english gave littl dissert on 
finish and unfinish subject, seem to observ mr. casaubon 
much as he did dorothea. will burst in here and there with ardent 
of prais, mark out particular merit in hi friend’s work; 
dorothea felt that she wa get quit new notion as to 
signific of madonna seat under inexplic canopi 
with the simpl countri as a background, and of saint 
architectur model in their hand, or knive accident wedg 
their skull. some thing which had seem monstrou to her 
gather intellig and even a natur mean: but all thi 
appar a branch of knowledg in which mr. casaubon had 
interest himself.

“i think i would rather feel that paint is beauti than have 
read it as an enigma; but i should learn to understand these 
sooner than your with the veri wide mean,” said dorothea, 
to will.

“don’t speak of my paint befor naumann,” said will. “he will 
you, it is all _pfuscherei_, which is hi most opprobri word!”

“is that true?” said dorothea, turn her sincer ey on naumann, 
made a slight grimac and said—

“oh, he doe not mean it serious with paint. hi walk must 
_bell-lettr_. that is wi-id.”

naumann’s pronunci of the vowel seem to stretch the 
satir. will did not half like it, but manag to laugh: and mr.
casaubon, while he felt some disgust at the artist’s german accent,
began to entertain a littl respect for hi judici sever.

the respect wa not diminish when naumann, after draw will 
for a moment and look, first at a larg canva, then at mr.
casaubon, came forward again and said—

“my friend ladislaw think you will pardon me, sir, if i sai that 
sketch of your head would be invalu to me for the st. 
aquina in my pictur there. it is too much to ask; but i so seldom 
just what i want—the idealist in the real.”

“you astonish me greatli, sir,” said mr. casaubon, hi look 
with a glow of delight; “but if my poor physiognomi, which i have 
accustom to regard as of the commonest order, can be of ani us 
you in furnish some trait for the angel doctor, i shall 
honor. that is to sai, if the oper will not be a lengthi on;
and if mr. casaubon will not object to the delai.”

as for dorothea, noth could have pleas her more, unless it 
been a miracul voic pronounc mr. casaubon the wisest 
worthiest among the son of men. in that case her totter faith 
have becom firm again.

naumann’s apparatu wa at hand in wonder complet, and 
sketch went on at onc as well as the convers. dorothea sat 
and subsid into calm silenc, feel happier than she had done for 
long while befor. everi on about her seem good, and she said 
herself that rome, if she had onli been less ignor, would have 
full of beauti: it sad would have been wing with hope. no 
could be less suspici than her: when she wa a child she 
in the gratitud of wasp and the honor suscept of sparrow,
and wa proportion indign when their base wa 
manifest.

the adroit artist wa ask mr. casaubon question about 
politi, which brought long answer, and, will meanwhil had 
himself on some step in the background overlook all.

present naumann said—“now if i could lai thi by for half an hour 
take it up again—come and look, ladislaw—i think it is perfect so far.”

will vent those adjur interject which impli that admir 
too strong for syntax; and naumann said in a tone of piteou regret—

“ah—now—if i could but have had more—but you have other engag—
could not ask it—or even to come again to-morrow.”

“oh, let us stai!” said dorothea. “we have noth to do to-dai 
go about, have we?” she ad, look entreatingli at mr. casaubon.
“it would be a piti not to make the head as good as possibl.”

“i am at your servic, sir, in the matter,” said mr. casaubon, 
polit condescens. “have given up the interior of my head 
idl, it is as well that the exterior should work in thi wai.”

“you ar unspeak good—now i am happi!” said naumann, and then 
on in german to will, point here and there to the sketch as if 
were consid that. put it asid for a moment, he look 
vagu, as if seek some occup for hi visitor, and 
turn to mr. casaubon, said—

“perhap the beauti bride, the graciou ladi, would not be 
to let me fill up the time by try to make a slight sketch 
her—not, of cours, as you see, for that pictur—onli as a 
studi.”

mr. casaubon, bow, doubt not that mr. casaubon would oblig him,
and dorothea said, at onc, “where shall i put myself?”

naumann wa all apolog in ask her to stand, and allow him 
adjust her attitud, to which she submit without ani of the 
air and laugh frequent thought necessari on such occas, 
the painter said, “it is as santa clara that i want you 
stand—lean so, with your cheek against your hand—so—look at 
stool, pleas, so!”

will wa divid between the inclin to fall at the saint’s 
and kiss her robe, and the temptat to knock naumann down while 
wa adjust her arm. all thi wa impud and desecr, and 
repent that he had brought her.

the artist wa dilig, and will recov himself move about 
occupi mr. casaubon as ingeni as he could; but he did not in 
end prevent the time from seem long to that gentleman, as wa 
from hi express a fear that mr. casaubon would be tire. 
took the hint and said—

“now, sir, if you can oblig me again; i will releas the ladi-wife.”

so mr. casaubon’s patienc held out further, and when after all 
turn out that the head of saint thoma aquina would be more 
if anoth sit could be had, it wa grant for the morrow. on 
morrow santa clara too wa retouch more than onc. the result of 
wa so far from displeas to mr. casaubon, that he arrang for 
purchas of the pictur in which saint thoma aquina sat among 
doctor of the church in a disput too abstract to be repres,
but listen to with more or less attent by an audienc abov. 
santa clara, which wa spoken of in the second place, naumann 
himself to be dissatisfi with—he could not, in conscienc, engag 
make a worthi pictur of it; so about the santa clara the 
wa condit.

i will not dwell on naumann’s joke at the expens of mr. casaubon 
even, or on hi dithyramb about dorothea’s charm, in all which 
join, but with a differ. no sooner did naumann mention ani 
of dorothea’s beauti, than will got exasper at hi presumpt:
there wa gross in hi choic of the most ordinari word, and 
busi had he to talk of her lip? she wa not a woman to be 
of as other women were. will could not sai just what he thought, but 
becam irrit. and yet, when after some resist he had 
to take the casaubon to hi friend’s studio, he had been allur 
the gratif of hi pride in be the person who could 
naumann such an opportun of studi her loveli—or rather 
divin, for the ordinari phrase which might appli to mere 
pretti were not applic to her. (certainli all tipton and 
neighborhood, as well as dorothea herself, would have been surpris 
her beauti be made so much of. in that part of the world miss 
had been onli a “fine young woman.”)

“oblig me by let the subject drop, naumann. mr. casaubon is 
to be talk of as if she were a model,” said will. naumann stare 
him.

“schön! i will talk of my aquina. the head is not a bad type, 
all. i dare sai the great scholast himself would have been 
to have hi portrait ask for. noth like these starchi doctor 
vaniti! it wa as i thought: he care much less for her portrait 
hi own.”

“he’s a curs white-blood pedant coxcomb,” said will, 
gnash impetuos. hi oblig to mr. casaubon were not known 
hi hearer, but will himself wa think of them, and wish that 
could discharg them all by a check.

naumann gave a shrug and said, “it is good thei go awai soon, my dear.
thei ar spoil your fine temper.”

all will’s hope and contriv were now concentr on 
dorothea when she wa alon. he onli want her to take more 
notic of him; he onli want to be someth more special in 
remembr than he could yet believ himself like to be. he 
rather impati under that open ardent good-will, which he saw wa 
usual state of feel. the remot worship of a woman throne out 
their reach plai a great part in men’s live, but in most case 
worshipp long for some queenli recognit, some approv sign 
which hi soul’s sovereign mai cheer him without descend from 
high place. that wa precis what will want. but there were 
of contradict in hi imagin demand. it wa beauti to 
how dorothea’s ey turn with wife anxieti and beseech to mr.
casaubon: she would have lost some of her halo if she had been 
that duteou preoccup; and yet at the next moment the husband’
sandi absorpt of such nectar wa too intoler; and will’s 
to sai damag thing about him wa perhap not the less 
becaus he felt the strongest reason for restrain it.

will had not been invit to dine the next dai. henc he 
himself that he wa bound to call, and that the onli elig time 
the middl of the dai, when mr. casaubon would not be at home.

dorothea, who had not been made awar that her former recept of 
had displeas her husband, had no hesit about see him,
especi as he might be come to pai a farewel visit. when he 
she wa look at some cameo which she had been bui for celia. 
greet will as if hi visit were quit a matter of cours, and said 
onc, have a cameo bracelet in her hand—

“i am so glad you ar come. perhap you understand all about cameo,
and can tell me if these ar realli good. i wish to have you with 
in choos them, but mr. casaubon object: he thought there wa 
time. he will finish hi work to-morrow, and we shall go awai in 
dai. i have been uneasi about these cameo. prai sit down and look 
them.”

“i am not particularli know, but there can be no great mistak 
these littl homer bit: thei ar exquisit neat. and the color 
fine: it will just suit you.”

“oh, thei ar for my sister, who ha quit a differ complexion. 
saw her with me at lowick: she is light-hair and veri pretti—at 
i think so. we were never so long awai from each other in our 
befor. she is a great pet and never wa naughti in her life. i 
out befor i came awai that she want me to bui her some cameo, and 
should be sorri for them not to be good—after their kind.” 
ad the last word with a smile.

“you seem not to care about cameo,” said will, seat himself at 
distanc from her, and observ her while she close the case.

“no, frankli, i don’t think them a great object in life,” 
dorothea.

“i fear you ar a heret about art gener. how is that? i 
have expect you to be veri sensit to the beauti everywher.”

“i suppos i am dull about mani thing,” said dorothea, simpli. “
should like to make life beauti—i mean everybodi’s life. and 
all thi immens expens of art, that seem somehow to lie outsid 
and make it no better for the world, pain on. it spoil my 
of anyth when i am made to think that most peopl ar shut out 
it.”

“i call that the fanatic of sympathi,” said will, impetu. “
might sai the same of landscap, of poetri, of all refin. if 
carri it out you ought to be miser in your own good, and 
evil that you might have no advantag over other. the best pieti is 
enjoi—when you can. you ar do the most then to save the earth’
charact as an agreeabl planet. and enjoy radiat. it is of 
us to try and take care of all the world; that is be taken care 
when you feel delight—in art or in anyth els. would you turn 
the youth of the world into a tragic choru, wail and 
over miseri? i suspect that you have some fals belief in the 
of miseri, and want to make your life a martyrdom.” will had 
further than he intend, and check himself. but dorothea’s 
wa not take just the same direct as hi own, and she 
without ani special emot—

“inde you mistak me. i am not a sad, melancholi creatur. i am 
unhappi long togeth. i am angri and naughti—not like celia: i have 
great outburst, and then all seem gloriou again. i cannot 
believ in gloriou thing in a blind sort of wai. i should be 
will to enjoi the art here, but there is so much that i don’t 
the reason of—so much that seem to me a consecr of 
rather than beauti. the paint and sculptur mai be wonder, 
the feel is often low and brutal, and sometim even ridicul.
here and there i see what take me at onc as nobl—someth that 
might compar with the alban mountain or the sunset from the 
hill; but that make it the greater piti that there is so littl of 
best kind among all that mass of thing over which men have toil so.”

“of cours there is alwai a great deal of poor work: the rarer 
want that soil to grow in.”

“oh dear,” said dorothea, take up that thought into the chief 
of her anxieti; “i see it must be veri difficult to do anyth good. 
have often felt sinc i have been in rome that most of our live 
look much uglier and more bungl than the pictur, if thei could 
put on the wall.”

dorothea part her lip again as if she were go to sai more, 
chang her mind and paus.

“you ar too young—it is an anachron for you to have such thought,”
said will, energet, with a quick shake of the head habitu 
him. “you talk as if you had never known ani youth. it is monstrou—
if you had had a vision of hade in your childhood, like the boi in 
legend. you have been brought up in some of those horribl notion 
choos the sweetest women to devour—like minotaur. and now you will 
and be shut up in that stone prison at lowick: you will be 
aliv. it make me savag to think of it! i would rather never 
seen you than think of you with such a prospect.”

will again fear that he had gone too far; but the mean we 
to word depend on our feel, and hi tone of angri regret had 
much kind in it for dorothea’s heart, which had alwai been 
out ardor and had never been fed with much from the live 
around her, that she felt a new sens of gratitud and answer with 
gentl smile—

“it is veri good of you to be anxiou about me. it is becaus you 
not like lowick yourself: you had set your heart on anoth kind 
life. but lowick is my chosen home.”

the last sentenc wa spoken with an almost solemn cadenc, and 
did not know what to sai, sinc it would not be us for him 
embrac her slipper, and tell her that he would die for her: it 
clear that she requir noth of the sort; and thei were both 
for a moment or two, when dorothea began again with an air of sai 
last what had been in her mind beforehand.

“i want to ask you again about someth you said the other dai.
perhap it wa half of it your live wai of speak: i notic 
you like to put thing strongli; i myself often exagger when i 
hastili.”

“what wa it?” said will, observ that she spoke with a 
quit new in her. “i have a hyperbol tongu: it catch fire as 
goe. i dare sai i shall have to retract.”

“i mean what you said about the necess of know german—i mean, 
the subject that mr. casaubon is engag in. i have been 
about it; and it seem to me that with mr. casaubon’s learn he 
have befor him the same materi as german scholar—ha he not?”
dorothea’s timid wa due to an indistinct conscious that she 
in the strang situat of consult a third person about 
adequaci of mr. casaubon’s learn.

“not exactli the same materi,” said will, think that he would 
duli reserv. “he is not an orientalist, you know. he doe not 
to have more than second-hand knowledg there.”

“but there ar veri valuabl book about antiqu which were 
a long while ago by scholar who knew noth about these 
thing; and thei ar still us. why should mr. casaubon’s not 
valuabl, like their?” said dorothea, with more remonstr energi.
she wa impel to have the argument aloud, which she had been 
in her own mind.

“that depend on the line of studi taken,” said will, also get 
tone of rejoind. “the subject mr. casaubon ha chosen is as 
as chemistri: new discoveri ar constantli make new point of view.
who want a system on the basi of the four element, or a book 
refut paracelsu? do you not see that it is no us now to be 
a littl wai after men of the last centuri—men like bryant—
correct their mistak?—live in a lumber-room and furbish 
broken-leg theori about chu and mizraim?”

“how can you bear to speak so lightli?” said dorothea, with a 
between sorrow and anger. “if it were as you sai, what could be 
than so much ardent labor all in vain? i wonder it doe not affect 
more painfulli, if you realli think that a man like mr. casaubon, of 
much good, power, and learn, should in ani wai fail in what 
been the labor of hi best year.” she wa begin to be shock 
she had got to such a point of supposit, and indign with will 
have led her to it.

“you question me about the matter of fact, not of feel,” 
will. “but if you wish to punish me for the fact, i submit. i am not 
a posit to express my feel toward mr. casaubon: it would be 
best a pension’s eulogi.”

“prai excus me,” said dorothea, color deepli. “i am awar, as 
sai, that i am in fault in have introduc the subject. inde, i 
wrong altogeth. failur after long persever is much grander 
never to have a strive good enough to be call a failur.”

“i quit agre with you,” said will, determin to chang 
situat—“so much so that i have made up my mind not to run that 
of never attain a failur. mr. casaubon’s generos ha 
been danger to me, and i mean to renounc the liberti it ha 
me. i mean to go back to england shortli and work my own wai—depend 
nobodi els than myself.”

“that is fine—i respect that feel,” said dorothea, with 
kind. “but mr. casaubon, i am sure, ha never thought of 
in the matter except what wa most for your welfar.”

“she ha obstinaci and pride enough to serv instead of love, now 
ha marri him,” said will to himself. aloud he said, rise—

“i shall not see you again.”

“oh, stai till mr. casaubon come,” said dorothea, earnestli. “i am 
glad we met in rome. i want to know you.”

“and i have made you angri,” said will. “i have made you think ill 
me.”

“oh no. my sister tell me i am alwai angri with peopl who do not 
just what i like. but i hope i am not given to think ill of them. 
the end i am usual oblig to think ill of myself for be 
impati.”

“still, you don’t like me; i have made myself an unpleas thought 
you.”

“not at all,” said dorothea, with the most open kind. “i like 
veri much.”

will wa not quit content, think that he would appar 
been of more import if he had been dislik. he said noth, 
look dull, not to sai sulki.

“and i am quit interest to see what you will do,” dorothea went 
cheerfulli. “i believ devoutli in a natur differ of vocat. 
it were not for that belief, i suppos i should be veri narrow—
ar so mani thing, besid paint, that i am quit ignor of. 
would hardli believ how littl i have taken in of music 
literatur, which you know so much of. i wonder what your vocat 
turn out to be: perhap you will be a poet?”

“that depend. to be a poet is to have a soul so quick to discern 
no shade of qualiti escap it, and so quick to feel, that 
is but a hand plai with fine order varieti on the chord 
emot—a soul in which knowledg pass instantan into feel,
and feel flash back as a new organ of knowledg. on mai have 
condit by fit onli.”

“but you leav out the poem,” said dorothea. “i think thei ar 
to complet the poet. i understand what you mean about 
pass into feel, for that seem to be just what i experi. 
i am sure i could never produc a poem.”

“you _ar_ a poem—and that is to be the best part of a poet—what 
up the poet’s conscious in hi best mood,” said will, show 
origin as we all share with the morn and the spring-time 
other endless renew.

“i am veri glad to hear it,” said dorothea, laugh out her word in 
bird-like modul, and look at will with play gratitud in 
ey. “what veri kind thing you sai to me!”

“i wish i could ever do anyth that would be what you call kind—
i could ever be of the slightest servic to you. i fear i shall 
have the opportun.” will spoke with fervor.

“oh ye,” said dorothea, cordial. “it will come; and i shall 
how well you wish me. i quit hope that we should be friend when 
first saw you—becaus of your relationship to mr. casaubon.” there 
a certain liquid bright in her ey, and will wa consciou 
hi own were obei a law of natur and fill too. the allus 
mr. casaubon would have spoil all if anyth at that moment 
have spoil the subdu power, the sweet digniti, of her 
unsuspici inexperi.

“and there is on thing even now that you can do,” said dorothea,
rise and walk a littl wai under the strength of a 
impuls. “promis me that you will not again, to ani on, speak of 
subject—i mean about mr. casaubon’s write—i mean in that kind 
wai. it wa i who led to it. it wa my fault. but promis me.”

she had return from her brief pace and stood opposit will, 
grave at him.

“certainli, i will promis you,” said will, redden howev. if 
never said a cut word about mr. casaubon again and left 
receiv favor from him, it would clearli be permiss to hate 
the more. the poet must know how to hate, sai goeth; and will wa 
least readi with that accomplish. he said that he must go 
without wait for mr. casaubon, whom he would come to take leav 
at the last moment. dorothea gave him her hand, and thei exchang 
simpl “good-by.”

but go out of the _port cocher_ he met mr. casaubon, and 
gentleman, express the best wish for hi cousin, polit 
the pleasur of ani further leav-take on the morrow, which would 
suffici crowd with the prepar for departur.

“i have someth to tell you about our cousin mr. ladislaw, which 
think will heighten your opinion of him,” said dorothea to her 
in the cours of the even. she had mention immedi on 
enter that will had just gone awai, and would come again, but mr.
casaubon had said, “i met him outsid, and we made our final adieux, 
believ,” sai thi with the air and tone by which we impli that 
subject, whether privat or public, doe not interest us enough to 
for a further remark upon it. so dorothea had wait.

“what is that, my love?” said mr casaubon (he alwai said “my love”
when hi manner wa the coldest).

“he ha made up hi mind to leav off wander at onc, and to give 
hi depend on your generos. he mean soon to go back to england,
and work hi own wai. i thought you would consid that a good sign,”
said dorothea, with an appeal look into her husband’s neutral face.

“did he mention the precis order of occup to which he 
addict himself?”

“no. but he said that he felt the danger which lai for him in 
generos. of cours he will write to you about it. do you not 
better of him for hi resolv?”

“i shall await hi commun on the subject,” said mr. casaubon.

“i told him i wa sure that the thing you consid in all you did 
him wa hi own welfar. i rememb your good in what you 
about him when i first saw him at lowick,” said dorothea, put 
hand on her husband’s.

“i had a duti toward him,” said mr. casaubon, lai hi other hand 
dorothea’s in conscienti accept of her caress, but with a 
which he could not hinder from be uneasi. “the young man, i confess,
is not otherwis an object of interest to me, nor need we, i think,
discuss hi futur cours, which it is not our to determin beyond 
limit which i have suffici indic.” dorothea did not 
will again.




book iii.
wait for death.




chapter xxiii.

“your hors of the sun,” he said,
    “and first-rate whip apollo!
whate’er thei be, i’ll eat my head,
    but i will beat them hollow.”


fred vinci, we have seen, had a debt on hi mind, and though no 
immateri burthen could depress that buoyant-heart young 
for mani hour togeth, there were circumst connect with 
debt which made the thought of it unusu importun. the 
wa mr. bambridg, a hors-dealer of the neighborhood, whose 
wa much sought in middlemarch by young men understood to be “
to pleasur.” dure the vacat fred had natur requir 
amus than he had readi monei for, and mr. bambridg had 
accommod enough not onli to trust him for the hire of hors 
the accident expens of ruin a fine hunter, but also to make 
small advanc by which he might be abl to meet some loss 
billiard. the total debt wa a hundr and sixti pound. bambridg 
in no alarm about hi monei, be sure that young vinci had backer;
but he had requir someth to show for it, and fred had at 
given a bill with hi own signatur. three month later he had 
thi bill with the signatur of caleb garth. on both occas fred 
felt confid that he should meet the bill himself, have ampl 
at dispos in hi own hope. you will hardli demand that 
confid should have a basi in extern fact; such confid, 
know, is someth less coars and materialist: it is a 
disposit lead us to expect that the wisdom of provid or 
folli of our friend, the mysteri of luck or the still 
mysteri of our high individu valu in the univers, will bring 
agreeabl issu, such as ar consist with our good tast 
costum, and our gener prefer for the best style of thing. 
felt sure that he should have a present from hi uncl, that he 
have a run of luck, that by dint of “swap” he should 
metamorphos a hors worth forti pound into a hors that would fetch 
hundr at ani moment—“judgment” be alwai equival to 
unspecifi sum in hard cash. and in ani case, even suppos 
which onli a morbid distrust could imagin, fred had alwai (at 
time) hi father’s pocket as a last resourc, so that hi asset 
hope had a sort of gorgeou superflu about them. of 
might be the capac of hi father’s pocket, fred had onli a 
notion: wa not trade elast? and would not the defici of 
year be made up for by the surplu of anoth? the vinci live in 
easi profus wai, not with ani new ostent, but accord to 
famili habit and tradit, so that the children had no standard 
economi, and the elder on retain some of their infantin 
that their father might pai for anyth if he would. mr. vinci 
had expens middlemarch habit—spent monei on cours, on 
cellar, and on dinner-give, while mamma had those run 
with tradespeopl, which give a cheer sens of get 
on want without ani question of payment. but it wa in the natur 
father, fred knew, to bulli on about expens: there wa alwai 
littl storm over hi extravag if he had to disclos a debt, 
fred dislik bad weather within door. he wa too filial to 
disrespect to hi father, and he bore the thunder with the 
that it wa transient; but in the mean time it wa disagre to 
hi mother cry, and also to be oblig to look sulki instead of 
fun; for fred wa so good-temper that if he look glum 
scold, it wa chiefli for proprieti’s sake. the easier 
plainli, wa to renew the bill with a friend’s signatur. why not? 
the superflu secur of hope at hi command, there wa no 
why he should not have increas other peopl’s liabil to 
extent, but for the fact that men whose name were good for 
were usual pessimist, indispos to believ that the univers 
of thing would necessarili be agreeabl to an agreeabl 
gentleman.

with a favor to ask we review our list of friend, do justic to 
more amiabl qualiti, forgiv their littl offens, and 
each in turn, try to arriv at the conclus that he will be eager 
oblig us, our own eager to be oblig be as communic 
other warmth. still there is alwai a certain number who ar 
as but moder eager until the other have refus; and it 
that fred check off all hi friend but on, on the ground 
appli to them would be disagre; be implicitli convinc 
he at least (whatev might be maintain about mankind gener) 
a right to be free from anyth disagre. that he should ever 
into a thoroughli unpleas posit—wear trouser shrunk 
wash, eat cold mutton, have to walk for want of a hors, or to “
under” in ani sort of wai—wa an absurd irreconcil with 
cheer intuit implant in him by natur. and fred winc 
the idea of be look down upon as want fund for small debt.
thu it came to pass that the friend whom he chose to appli to wa 
onc the poorest and the kindest—name, caleb garth.

the garth were veri fond of fred, as he wa of them; for when he 
rosamond were littl on, and the garth were better off, the 
connect between the two famili through mr. featherston’s 
marriag (the first to mr. garth’s sister, and the second to mr.
vinci’s) had led to an acquaint which wa carri on between 
children rather than the parent: the children drank tea togeth 
of their toi teacup, and spent whole dai togeth in plai. mari wa 
littl hoyden, and fred at six year old thought her the nicest girl 
the world, make her hi wife with a brass ring which he had cut 
an umbrella. through all the stage of hi educ he had kept 
affect for the garth, and hi habit of go to their hous as 
second home, though ani intercours between them and the elder of 
famili had long ceas. even when caleb garth wa prosper, 
vinci were on condescend term with him and hi wife, for 
were nice distinct of rank in middlemarch; and though 
manufactur could not ani more than duke be connect with none 
equal, thei were consciou of an inher social superior which 
defin with great niceti in practic, though hardli 
theoret. sinc then mr. garth had fail in the 
busi, which he had unfortun ad to hi other avoc 
surveyor, valuer, and agent, had conduct that busi for a 
entir for the benefit of hi assigne, and had been 
narrowli, exert himself to the utmost that he might after all 
twenti shill in the pound. he had now achiev thi, and from 
who did not think it a bad preced, hi honor exert had 
him due esteem; but in no part of the world is genteel visit 
on esteem, in the absenc of suitabl furnitur and 
dinner-servic. mr. vinci had never been at her eas with mr. garth,
and frequent spoke of her as a woman who had had to work for 
bread—mean that mr. garth had been a teacher befor her marriag;
in which case an intimaci with lindlei murrai and mangnal’s 
wa someth like a draper’s discrimin of calico trademark, or 
courier’s acquaint with foreign countri: no woman who wa 
off need that sort of thing. and sinc mari had been keep mr.
featherston’s hous, mr. vinci’s want of like for the garth 
been convert into someth more posit, by alarm lest fred 
engag himself to thi plain girl, whose parent “live in such a 
wai.” fred, be awar of thi, never spoke at home of hi visit 
mr. garth, which had of late becom more frequent, the 
ardor of hi affect for mari inclin him the more toward 
who belong to her.

mr. garth had a small offic in the town, and to thi fred went 
hi request. he obtain it without much difficulti, for a larg 
of pain experi had not suffic to make caleb garth 
about hi own affair, or distrust of hi fellow-men when thei 
not prove themselv untrustworthi; and he had the highest opinion 
fred, wa “sure the lad would turn out well—an open 
fellow, with a good bottom to hi charact—you might trust him 
anyth.” such wa caleb’s psycholog argument. he wa on of 
rare men who ar rigid to themselv and indulg to other. he had 
certain shame about hi neighbor’ error, and never spoke of 
willingli; henc he wa not like to divert hi mind from the 
mode of harden timber and other ingeni devic in order 
preconc those error. if he had to blame ani on, it wa 
for him to move all the paper within hi reach, or describ 
diagram with hi stick, or make calcul with the odd monei in 
pocket, befor he could begin; and he would rather do other men’s 
than find fault with their do. i fear he wa a bad disciplinarian.

when fred state the circumst of hi debt, hi wish to meet 
without troubl hi father, and the certainti that the monei would 
forthcom so as to caus no on ani inconveni, caleb push 
spectacl upward, listen, look into hi favorit’s clear 
ey, and believ him, not distinguish confid about the 
from verac about the past; but he felt that it wa an occas for 
friendli hint as to conduct, and that befor give hi signatur 
must give a rather strong admonit. accordingli, he took the 
and lower hi spectacl, measur the space at hi command, 
hi pen and examin it, dip it in the ink and examin it again,
then push the paper a littl wai from him, lift up hi 
again, show a deepen depress in the outer angl of hi 
eyebrow, which gave hi face a peculiar mild (pardon these 
for onc—you would have learn to love them if you had known 
garth), and said in a comfort tone,—

“it wa a misfortun, eh, that break the hors’s knee? and then,
these exchang, thei don’t answer when you have ’cute jockei to 
with. you’ll be wiser anoth time, my boi.”

whereupon caleb drew down hi spectacl, and proceed to write 
signatur with the care which he alwai gave to that perform; 
whatev he did in the wai of busi he did well. he contempl 
larg well-proport letter and final flourish, with hi head 
trifl on on side for an instant, then hand it to fred, 
“good-by,” and return forthwith to hi absorpt in a plan for 
jame chettam’s new farm-build.

either becaus hi interest in thi work thrust the incid of 
signatur from hi memori, or for some reason of which caleb wa 
consciou, mr. garth remain ignor of the affair.

sinc it occur, a chang had come over fred’s sky, which alter 
view of the distanc, and wa the reason why hi uncl featherston’
present of monei wa of import enough to make hi color come 
go, first with a too definit expect, and afterward with 
proportion disappoint. hi failur in pass hi examin,
had made hi accumul of colleg debt the more unpardon by 
father, and there had been an unpreced storm at home. mr. 
had sworn that if he had anyth more of that sort to put up with,
fred should turn out and get hi live how he could; and he had 
yet quit recov hi good-humor tone to hi son, who 
especi enrag him by sai at thi stage of thing that he 
not want to be a clergyman, and would rather not “go on with that.”
fred wa consciou that he would have been yet more sever dealt 
if hi famili as well as himself had not secretli regard him as mr.
featherston’s heir; that old gentleman’s pride in him, and 
fond for him, serv in the stead of more exemplari conduct—
as when a youth nobleman steal jewelleri we call the 
kleptomania, speak of it with a philosoph smile, and never think 
hi be sent to the hous of correct as if he were a rag 
who had stolen turnip. in fact, tacit expect of what would 
done for him by uncl featherston determin the angl at which 
peopl view fred vinci in middlemarch; and in hi own conscious,
what uncl featherston would do for him in an emerg, or what 
would do simpli as an incorpor luck, form alwai an 
depth of aerial perspect. but that present of bank-note, onc made,
wa measur, and be appli to the amount of the debt, show 
deficit which had still to be fill up either by fred’s “judgment” 
by luck in some other shape. for that littl episod of the 
borrow, in which he had made hi father the agent in get 
bulstrod certif, wa a new reason against go to hi father 
monei toward meet hi actual debt. fred wa keen enough to 
that anger would confus distinct, and that hi denial of 
borrow expressli on the strength of hi uncl’s will would be 
as a falsehood. he had gone to hi father and told him on 
affair, and he had left anoth untold: in such case the 
revel alwai produc the impress of a previou duplic. 
fred piqu himself on keep clear of li, and even fib; he 
shrug hi shoulder and made a signific grimac at what he 
rosamond’s fib (it is onli brother who can associ such idea 
a love girl); and rather than incur the accus of falsehood 
would even incur some troubl and self-restraint. it wa under 
inward pressur of thi kind that fred had taken the wise step 
deposit the eighti pound with hi mother. it wa a piti that he 
not at onc given them to mr. garth; but he meant to make the 
complet with anoth sixti, and with a view to thi, he had 
twenti pound in hi own pocket as a sort of seed-corn, which, 
by judgment, and water by luck, might yield more than threefold—
veri poor rate of multipl when the field is a young gentleman’
infinit soul, with all the numer at command.

fred wa not a gambler: he had not that specif diseas in which 
suspens of the whole nervou energi on a chanc or risk becom 
necessari as the dram to the drunkard; he had onli the tendenc to 
diffus form of gambl which ha no alcohol intens, but 
carri on with the healthiest chyle-fed blood, keep up a 
imagin activ which fashion event accord to desir, 
have no fear about it own weather, onli see the advantag 
must be to other in go aboard with it. hope ha a 
in make a throw of ani kind, becaus the prospect of success 
certain; and onli a more gener pleasur in offer as mani 
possibl a share in the stake. fred like plai, especi billiard,
as he like hunt or ride a steepl-chase; and he onli like it 
better becaus he want monei and hope to win. but the twenti pound’
worth of seed-corn had been plant in vain in the seduct 
plot—all of it at least which had not been dispers by 
roadsid—and fred found himself close upon the term of payment with 
monei at command beyond the eighti pound which he had deposit 
hi mother. the broken-wind hors which he rode repres a 
which had been made to him a long while ago by hi uncl featherston:
hi father alwai allow him to keep a hors, mr. vinci’s own 
make him regard thi as a reason demand even for a son who 
rather exasper. thi hors, then, wa fred’s properti, and in 
anxieti to meet the immin bill he determin to sacrific 
possess without which life would certainli be worth littl. he 
the resolut with a sens of heroism—heroism forc on him by 
dread of break hi word to mr. garth, by hi love for mari and 
of her opinion. he would start for houndslei hors-fair which wa to 
held the next morn, and—simpli sell hi hors, bring back 
monei by coach?—well, the hors would hardli fetch more than 
pound, and there wa no know what might happen; it would be 
to balk himself of luck beforehand. it wa a hundr to on that 
good chanc would fall in hi wai; the longer he thought of it, 
less possibl it seem that he should not have a good chanc, and 
less reason that he should not equip himself with the powder 
shot for bring it down. he would ride to houndslei with 
and with horrock “the vet,” and without ask them anyth expressli,
he should virtual get the benefit of their opinion. befor he 
out, fred got the eighti pound from hi mother.

most of those who saw fred ride out of middlemarch in compani 
bambridg and horrock, on hi wai of cours to houndslei hors-fair,
thought that young vinci wa pleasur-seek as usual; and but for 
unwont conscious of grave matter on hand, he himself would 
had a sens of dissip, and of do what might be expect of 
gai young fellow. consid that fred wa not at all coars, that 
rather look down on the manner and speech of young men who had 
been to the univers, and that he had written stanza as pastor 
unvoluptu as hi flute-plai, hi attract toward bambridg 
horrock wa an interest fact which even the love of hors-
would not wholli account for without that mysteri influenc 
name which determin so much of mortal choic. under ani 
name than “pleasur” the societi of messieur bambridg and 
must certainli have been regard as monoton; and to arriv 
them at houndslei on a drizzl afternoon, to get down at the red 
in a street shade with coal-dust, and dine in a room furnish with 
dirt-enamel map of the counti, a bad portrait of an anonym 
in a stabl, hi majesti georg the fourth with leg and cravat, 
variou leaden spittoon, might have seem a hard busi, but 
the sustain power of nomenclatur which determin that the 
of these thing wa “gai.”

in mr. horrock there wa certainli an appar unfathom 
offer plai to the imagin. costum, at a glanc, gave him 
thrill associ with hors (enough to specifi the hat-brim 
took the slightest upward angl just to escap the suspicion of 
downward), and natur had given him a face which by dint of 
ey, and a nose, mouth, and chin seem to follow hi hat-brim in 
moder inclin upward, gave the effect of a subdu 
sceptic smile, of all express the most tyrann over 
suscept mind, and, when accompani by adequ silenc, like 
creat the reput of an invinc understand, an infinit 
of humor—too dry to flow, and probabl in a state of 
crust,—and a critic judgment which, if you could ever be 
enough to know it, would be _the_ thing and no other. it is 
physiognomi seen in all vocat, but perhap it ha never been 
power over the youth of england than in a judg of hors.

mr. horrock, at a question from fred about hi hors’s fetlock, 
sidewai in hi saddl, and watch the hors’s action for the space 
three minut, then turn forward, twitch hi own bridl, 
remain silent with a profil neither more nor less sceptic than 
had been.

the part thu plai in dialogu by mr. horrock wa terribl effect.
a mixtur of passion wa excit in fred—a mad desir to 
horrock’s opinion into utter, restrain by anxieti to retain 
advantag of hi friendship. there wa alwai the chanc that 
might sai someth quit invalu at the right moment.

mr. bambridg had more open manner, and appear to give forth 
idea without economi. he wa loud, robust, and wa sometim spoken 
as be “given to indulg”—chiefli in swear, drink, 
beat hi wife. some peopl who had lost by him call him a 
man; but he regard hors-deal as the finest of the art, and 
have argu plausibl that it had noth to do with moral. he 
undeni a prosper man, bore hi drink better than other 
their moder, and, on the whole, flourish like the 
bai-tree. but hi rang of convers wa limit, and like the 
old tune, “drop of brandi,” gave you after a while a sens 
return upon itself in a wai that might make weak head dizzi. but 
slight infus of mr. bambridg wa felt to give tone and charact 
sever circl in middlemarch; and he wa a distinguish figur 
the bar and billiard-room at the green dragon. he knew some 
about the hero of the turf, and variou clever trick of 
and viscount which seem to prove that blood assert 
pre-emin even among black-leg; but the minut retent of 
memori wa chiefli shown about the hors he had himself bought 
sold; the number of mile thei would trot you in no time 
turn a hair be, after the laps of year, still a subject 
passion assever, in which he would assist the imagin 
hi hearer by solemnli swear that thei never saw anyth like it.
in short, mr. bambridg wa a man of pleasur and a gai companion.

fred wa subtl, and did not tell hi friend that he wa go 
houndslei bent on sell hi hors: he wish to get indirectli 
their genuin opinion of it valu, not be awar that a 
opinion wa the last thing like to be extract from such 
critic. it wa not mr. bambridg’s weak to be a 
flatter. he had never befor been so much struck with the fact 
thi unfortun bai wa a roarer to a degre which requir 
roundest word for perdit to give you ani idea of it.

“you made a bad hand at swap when you went to anybodi but me,
vinci! why, you never threw your leg across a finer hors than 
chestnut, and you gave him for thi brute. if you set him canter, 
goe on like twenti sawyer. i never heard but on wors roarer in 
life, and that wa a roan: it belong to pegwel, the corn-factor; 
us to drive him in hi gig seven year ago, and he want me to 
him, but i said, ‘thank you, peg, i don’t deal in wind-instrument.’
that wa what i said. it went the round of the countri, that joke did.
but, what the hell! the hors wa a penni trumpet to that roarer 
your.”

“why, you said just now hi wa wors than mine,” said fred, 
irrit than usual.

“i said a lie, then,” said mr. bambridg, emphat. “there wasn’t 
penni to choos between ’em.”

fred spur hi hors, and thei trot on a littl wai. when 
slacken again, mr. bambridg said—

“not but what the roan wa a better trotter than your.”

“i’m quit satisfi with hi pace, i know,” said fred, who 
all the conscious of be in gai compani to support him; “i 
hi trot is an uncommonli clean on, eh, horrock?”

mr. horrock look befor him with as complet a neutral as if 
had been a portrait by a great master.

fred gave up the fallaci hope of get a genuin opinion; but 
reflect he saw that bambridg’s depreci and horrock’s 
were both virtual encourag, and indic that thei thought 
of the hors than thei chose to sai.

that veri even, inde, befor the fair had set in, fred thought 
saw a favor open for dispos advantag of hi hors, 
an open which made him congratul himself on hi foresight 
bring with him hi eighti pound. a young farmer, acquaint 
mr. bambridg, came into the red lion, and enter into 
about part with a hunter, which he introduc at onc as diamond,
impli that it wa a public charact. for himself he onli want 
us hack, which would draw upon occas; be about to marri 
to give up hunt. the hunter wa in a friend’s stabl at some 
distanc; there wa still time for gentlemen to see it befor dark. 
friend’s stabl had to be reach through a back street where you 
as easili have been poison without expens of drug as in ani 
street of that unsanitari period. fred wa not fortifi 
disgust by brandi, as hi companion were, but the hope of have 
last seen the hors that would enabl him to make monei 
exhilar enough to lead him over the same ground again the 
thing in the morn. he felt sure that if he did not come to a 
with the farmer, bambridg would; for the stress of circumst, 
felt, wa sharpen hi acut and endow him with all 
construct power of suspicion. bambridg had run down diamond in 
wai that he never would have done (the hors be a friend’s) if 
had not thought of bui it; everi on who look at the anim—
horrock—wa evid impress with it merit. to get all 
advantag of be with men of thi sort, you must know how to 
your infer, and not be a spoon who take thing liter. 
color of the hors wa a dappl grai, and fred happen to know 
lord medlicot’s man wa on the look-out for just such a hors. 
all hi run down, bambridg let it out in the cours of 
even, when the farmer wa absent, that he had seen wors hors 
for eighti pound. of cours he contradict himself twenti time over,
but when you know what is like to be true you can test a man’
admiss. and fred could not but reckon hi own judgment of a 
as worth someth. the farmer had paus over fred’s 
though broken-wind steed long enough to show that he thought it 
consider, and it seem probabl that he would take it, 
five-and-twenti pound in addit, as the equival of diamond. 
that case fred, when he had part with hi new hors for at 
eighti pound, would be fifti-five pound in pocket by the transact,
and would have a hundr and thirti-five pound toward meet 
bill; so that the deficit temporarili thrown on mr. garth would at 
utmost be twenti-five pound. by the time he wa hurri on 
cloth in the morn, he saw so clearli the import of not 
thi rare chanc, that if bambridg and horrock had both dissuad him,
he would not have been delud into a direct interpret of 
purpos: he would have been awar that those deep hand held 
els than a young fellow’s interest. with regard to hors, 
wa your onli clew. but sceptic, as we know, can never be 
appli, els life would come to a standstil: someth we 
believ in and do, and whatev that someth mai be call, it 
virtual our own judgment, even when it seem like the most 
relianc on anoth. fred believ in the excel of hi bargain,
and even befor the fair had well set in, had got possess of 
dappl grai, at the price of hi old hors and thirti pound 
addit—onli five pound more than he had expect to give.

but he felt a littl worri and weari, perhap with mental debat,
and without wait for the further gayeti of the hors-fair, he 
out alon on hi fourteen mile’ journei, mean to take it 
quietli and keep hi hors fresh.




chapter xxiv.

“the offend’s sorrow bring but small 
to him who wear the strong offenc’s cross.”
—shakespear: _sonnet_.


i am sorri to sai that onli the third dai after the propiti 
at houndslei fred vinci had fallen into wors spirit than he had 
in hi life befor. not that he had been disappoint as to 
possibl market for hi hors, but that befor the bargain could 
conclud with lord medlicot’s man, thi diamond, in which hope to 
amount of eighti pound had been invest, had without the 
warn exhibit in the stabl a most viciou energi in kick, 
just miss kill the groom, and had end in lame himself 
by catch hi leg in a rope that overhung the stabl-board. there 
no more redress for thi than for the discoveri of bad temper 
marriag—which of cours old companion were awar of befor 
ceremoni. for some reason or other, fred had none of hi 
elast under thi stroke of ill-fortun: he wa simpli awar 
he had onli fifti pound, that there wa no chanc of hi get 
more at present, and that the bill for a hundr and sixti would 
present in five dai. even if he had appli to hi father on 
plea that mr. garth should be save from loss, fred felt 
that hi father would angrili refus to rescu mr. garth from 
consequ of what he would call encourag extravag and deceit.
he wa so utterli downcast that he could frame no other project than 
go straight to mr. garth and tell him the sad truth, carri with 
the fifti pound, and get that sum at least safe out of hi 
hand. hi father, be at the warehous, did not yet know of 
accid: when he did, he would storm about the viciou brute 
brought into hi stabl; and befor meet that lesser annoy 
want to get awai with all hi courag to face the greater. he 
hi father’s nag, for he had made up hi mind that when he had told mr.
garth, he would ride to stone court and confess all to mari. in fact,
it is probabl that but for mari’s exist and fred’s love for her,
hi conscienc would have been much less activ both in 
urg the debt on hi thought and impel him not to spare 
after hi usual fashion by defer an unpleas task, but to act 
directli and simpli as he could. even much stronger mortal than 
vinci hold half their rectitud in the mind of the be thei 
best. “the theatr of all my action is fallen,” said an 
personag when hi chief friend wa dead; and thei ar fortun 
get a theatr where the audienc demand their best. certainli it 
have made a consider differ to fred at that time if mari 
had had no decid notion as to what wa admir in charact.

mr. garth wa not at the offic, and fred rode on to hi hous, 
wa a littl wai outsid the town—a home place with an orchard 
front of it, a rambl, old-fashion, half-timber build, 
befor the town had spread had been a farm-hous, but wa 
surround with the privat garden of the townsmen. we get the 
of our hous if thei have a physiognomi of their own, as our 
have. the garth famili, which wa rather a larg on, for mari had 
brother and on sister, were veri fond of their old hous, from 
all the best furnitur had long been sold. fred like it too, 
it by heart even to the attic which smelt delici of appl 
quinc, and until to-dai he had never come to it without 
expect; but hi heart beat uneasili now with the sens that 
should probabl have to make hi confess befor mr. garth, of 
he wa rather more in aw than of her husband. not that she 
inclin to sarcasm and to impuls salli, as mari wa. in 
present matronli ag at least, mr. garth never commit herself 
over-hasti speech; have, as she said, born the yoke in her youth,
and learn self-control. she had that rare sens which discern 
is unalter, and submit to it without murmur. ador 
husband’s virtu, she had veri earli made up her mind to 
incapac of mind hi own interest, and had met the 
cheerfulli. she had been magnanim enough to renounc all pride 
teapot or children’s frill, and had never pour ani 
confid into the ear of her feminin neighbor concern mr.
garth’s want of prudenc and the sum he might have had if he had 
like other men. henc these fair neighbor thought her either proud 
eccentr, and sometim spoke of her to their husband as “your 
mr. garth.” she wa not without her critic of them in return, 
more accur instruct than most matron in middlemarch, and—
is the blameless woman?—apt to be a littl sever toward her own sex,
which in her opinion wa frame to be entir subordin. on 
other hand, she wa disproportion indulg toward the 
of men, and wa often heard to sai that these were natur. also, 
must be admit that mr. garth wa a trifl too emphat in 
resist to what she held to be folli: the passag from 
into housewif had wrought itself a littl too strongli into 
conscious, and she rare forgot that while her grammar and 
were abov the town standard, she wore a plain cap, cook the 
dinner, and darn all the stock. she had sometim taken pupil 
a peripatet fashion, make them follow her about in the kitchen 
their book or slate. she thought it good for them to see that she 
make an excel lather while she correct their blunder “
look,”—that a woman with her sleev tuck up abov her 
might know all about the subjunct mood or the torrid zone—that, 
short, she might possess “educ” and other good thing end 
“tion,” and worthi to be pronounc emphat, without be 
useless doll. when she made remark to thi edifi effect, she had 
firm littl frown on her brow, which yet did not hinder her face 
look benevol, and her word which came forth like a 
were utter in a fervid agreeabl contralto. certainli, the 
mr. garth had her droll aspect, but her charact sustain 
odditi, as a veri fine wine sustain a flavor of skin.

toward fred vinci she had a motherli feel, and had alwai 
dispos to excus hi error, though she would probabl not 
excus mari for engag herself to him, her daughter be 
in that more rigor judgment which she appli to her own sex. 
thi veri fact of her except indulg toward him made it 
harder to fred that he must now inevit sink in her opinion. and 
circumst of hi visit turn out to be still more unpleas 
he had expect; for caleb garth had gone out earli to look at 
repair not far off. mr. garth at certain hour wa alwai in 
kitchen, and thi morn she wa carri on sever occup 
onc there—make her pi at the well-scour deal tabl on on 
of that airi room, observ salli’s movement at the oven 
dough-tub through an open door, and give lesson to her youngest 
and girl, who were stand opposit to her at the tabl with 
book and slate befor them. a tub and a cloth-hors at the 
end of the kitchen indic an intermitt wash of small thing 
go on.

mr. garth, with her sleev turn abov her elbow, deftli 
her pastri—appli her roll-pin and give ornament pinch,
while she expound with grammat fervor what were the right 
about the concord of verb and pronoun with “noun of multitud 
signifi mani,” wa a sight agreeabl amus. she wa of the 
curli-hair, squar-face type as mari, but handsom, with 
delicaci of featur, a pale skin, a solid matronli figur, and 
remark firm of glanc. in her snowi-frill cap she 
on of that delight frenchwoman whom we have all seen market,
basket on arm. look at the mother, you might hope that the 
would becom like her, which is a prospect advantag equal to 
dowri—the mother too often stand behind the daughter like 
malign propheci—“such as i am, she will shortli be.”

“now let us go through that onc more,” said mr. garth, pinch 
appl-puff which seem to distract ben, an energet young male with 
heavi brow, from due attent to the lesson. “‘not without regard 
the import of the word as convei uniti or plural of idea’—tell 
again what that mean, ben.”

(mr. garth, like more celebr educ, had her favorit 
path, and in a gener wreck of societi would have tri to hold 
“lindlei murrai” abov the wave.)

“oh—it mean—you must think what you mean,” said ben, rather peevishli.
“i hate grammar. what’s the us of it?”

“to teach you to speak and write correctli, so that you can 
understood,” said mr. garth, with sever precis. “should you 
to speak as old job doe?”

“ye,” said ben, stoutli; “it’s funnier. he sai, ‘yo goo’—that’s 
as good as ‘you go.’”

“but he sai, ‘a ship’s in the garden,’ instead of ‘a sheep,’” 
letti, with an air of superior. “you might think he meant a ship 
the sea.”

“no, you mightn’t, if you weren’t silli,” said ben. “how could a 
off the sea come there?”

“these thing belong onli to pronunci, which is the least part 
grammar,” said mr. garth. “that appl-peel is to be eaten by the pig,
ben; if you eat it, i must give them your piec of pasti. job ha 
to speak about veri plain thing. how do you think you would write 
speak about anyth more difficult, if you knew no more of 
than he doe? you would us wrong word, and put word in the 
place, and instead of make peopl understand you, thei would 
awai from you as a tiresom person. what would you do then?”

“i shouldn’t care, i should leav off,” said ben, with a sens 
thi wa an agreeabl issu where grammar wa concern.

“i see you ar get tire and stupid, ben,” said mr. garth,
accustom to these obstruct argument from her male offspr.
have finish her pi, she move toward the cloth-hors, 
said, “come here and tell me the stori i told you on wednesdai, 
cincinnatu.”

“i know! he wa a farmer,” said ben.

“now, ben, he wa a roman—let _me_ tell,” said letti, us her 
contenti.

“you silli thing, he wa a roman farmer, and he wa plough.”

“ye, but befor that—that didn’t come first—peopl want him,” 
letti.

“well, but you must sai what sort of a man he wa first,” insist ben.
“he wa a wise man, like my father, and that made the peopl want 
advic. and he wa a brave man, and could fight. and so could 
father—couldn’t he, mother?”

“now, ben, let me tell the stori straight on, as mother told it us,”
said letti, frown. “pleas, mother, tell ben not to speak.”

“letti, i am asham of you,” said her mother, wring out the 
from the tub. “when your brother began, you ought to have wait to 
if he could not tell the stori. how rude you look, push 
frown, as if you want to conquer with your elbow! cincinnatu, 
am sure, would have been sorri to see hi daughter behav so.” (mr.
garth deliv thi aw sentenc with much majesti of enunci,
and letti felt that between repress volubl and gener disesteem,
that of the roman inclus, life wa alreadi a pain affair.) “now,
ben.”

“well—oh—well—why, there wa a great deal of fight, and thei 
all blockhead, and—i can’t tell it just how you told it—but 
want a man to be captain and king and everyth—”

“dictat, now,” said letti, with injur look, and not without a 
to make her mother repent.

“veri well, dictat!” said ben, contemptu. “but that isn’t a 
word: he didn’t tell them to write on slate.”

“come, come, ben, you ar not so ignor as that,” said mr. garth,
carefulli seriou. “hark, there is a knock at the door! run, letti, 
open it.”

the knock wa fred’s; and when letti said that her father wa not 
yet, but that her mother wa in the kitchen, fred had no altern.
he could not depart from hi usual practic of go to see mr. 
in the kitchen if she happen to be at work there. he put hi 
round letti’s neck silent, and led her into the kitchen without 
usual joke and caress.

mr. garth wa surpris to see fred at thi hour, but surpris wa 
a feel that she wa given to express, and she onli said, 
continu her work—

“you, fred, so earli in the dai? you look quit pale. ha 
happen?”

“i want to speak to mr. garth,” said fred, not yet readi to 
more—“and to you also,” he ad, after a littl paus, for he had 
doubt that mr. garth knew everyth about the bill, and he must 
the end speak of it befor her, if not to her sole.

“caleb will be in again in a few minut,” said mr. garth, 
imagin some troubl between fred and hi father. “he is sure not 
be long, becaus he ha some work at hi desk that must be done 
morn. do you mind stai with me, while i finish my matter here?”

“but we needn’t go on about cincinnatu, need we?” said ben, who 
taken fred’s whip out of hi hand, and wa try it effici on 
cat.

“no, go out now. but put that whip down. how veri mean of you to 
poor old tortois! prai take the whip from him, fred.”

“come, old boi, give it me,” said fred, put out hi hand.

“will you let me ride on your hors to-dai?” said ben, render up 
whip, with an air of not be oblig to do it.

“not to-dai—anoth time. i am not ride my own hors.”

“shall you see mari to-dai?”

“ye, i think so,” said fred, with an unpleas twing.

“tell her to come home soon, and plai at forfeit, and make fun.”

“enough, enough, ben! run awai,” said mr. garth, see that fred 
teas.

“ar letti and ben your onli pupil now, mr. garth?” said fred, 
the children were gone and it wa need to sai someth that 
pass the time. he wa not yet sure whether he should wait for mr.
garth, or us ani good opportun in convers to confess to mr.
garth herself, give her the monei and ride awai.

“on—onli on. fanni hackbutt come at half past eleven. i am 
get a great incom now,” said mr. garth, smile. “i am at a 
ebb with pupil. but i have save my littl purs for alfr’s premium:
i have nineti-two pound. he can go to mr. hanmer’s now; he is just 
the right ag.”

thi did not lead well toward the new that mr. garth wa on the 
of lose nineti-two pound and more. fred wa silent. “young 
who go to colleg ar rather more costli than that,” mr. 
innoc continu, pull out the edg on a cap-border. “
caleb think that alfr will turn out a distinguish engin: 
want to give the boi a good chanc. there he is! i hear him come in.
we will go to him in the parlor, shall we?”

when thei enter the parlor caleb had thrown down hi hat and 
seat at hi desk.

“what! fred, my boi!” he said, in a tone of mild surpris, hold 
pen still undip; “you ar here betim.” but miss the 
express of cheer greet in fred’s face, he immedi ad,
“is there anyth up at home?—anyth the matter?”

“ye, mr. garth, i am come to tell someth that i am afraid will 
you a bad opinion of me. i am come to tell you and mr. garth that 
can’t keep my word. i can’t find the monei to meet the bill after all.
i have been unfortun; i have onli got these fifti pound toward 
hundr and sixti.”

while fred wa speak, he had taken out the note and laid them 
the desk befor mr. garth. he had burst forth at onc with the 
fact, feel boyishli miser and without verbal resourc. mr.
garth wa mute astonish, and look at her husband for 
explan. caleb blush, and after a littl paus said—

“oh, i didn’t tell you, susan: i put my name to a bill for fred; it 
for a hundr and sixti pound. he made sure he could meet it himself.”

there wa an evid chang in mr. garth’s face, but it wa like 
chang below the surfac of water which remain smooth. she fix 
ey on fred, sai—

“i suppos you have ask your father for the rest of the monei and 
ha refus you.”

“no,” said fred, bite hi lip, and speak with more difficulti;
“but i know it will be of no us to ask him; and unless it were of us,
i should not like to mention mr. garth’s name in the matter.”

“it ha come at an unfortun time,” said caleb, in hi 
wai, look down at the note and nervous finger the paper,
“christma upon us—i’m rather hard up just now. you see, i have to 
out everyth like a tailor with short measur. what can we do, susan?
i shall want everi farth we have in the bank. it’s a hundr and 
pound, the deuc take it!”

“i must give you the nineti-two pound that i have put by for alfr’
premium,” said mr. garth, grave and decis, though a nice 
might have discern a slight tremor in some of the word. “and i 
no doubt that mari ha twenti pound save from her salari by 
time. she will advanc it.”

mr. garth had not again look at fred, and wa not in the 
calcul what word she should us to cut him the most effect.
like the eccentr woman she wa, she wa at present absorb 
consid what wa to be done, and did not fanci that the end 
be better achiev by bitter remark or explos. but she had 
fred feel for the first time someth like the tooth of remors.
curious enough, hi pain in the affair beforehand had 
almost entir in the sens that he must seem dishonor, and 
in the opinion of the garth: he had not occupi himself with 
inconveni and possibl injuri that hi breach might occas them,
for thi exercis of the imagin on other peopl’s need is 
common with hope young gentlemen. inde we ar most of us 
up in the notion that the highest motiv for not do a wrong 
someth irrespect of the be who would suffer the wrong. but 
thi moment he suddenli saw himself as a piti rascal who wa 
two women of their save.

“i shall certainli pai it all, mr. garth—ultim,” he 
out.

“ye, ultim,” said mr. garth, who have a special dislik 
fine word on ugli occas, could not now repress an epigram. “
boi cannot well be apprent ultim: thei should be 
at fifteen.” she had never been so littl inclin to make excus 
fred.

“i wa the most in the wrong, susan,” said caleb. “fred made sure 
find the monei. but i’d no busi to be finger bill. i 
you have look all round and tri all honest mean?” he ad, 
hi merci grai ey on fred. caleb wa too delic to specifi mr.
featherston.

“ye, i have tri everyth—i realli have. i should have had 
hundr and thirti pound readi but for a misfortun with a hors 
i wa about to sell. my uncl had given me eighti pound, and i 
awai thirti with my old hors in order to get anoth which i wa 
to sell for eighti or more—i meant to go without a hors—but now it 
turn out viciou and lame itself. i wish i and the hors too 
been at the devil, befor i had brought thi on you. there’s no 
els i care so much for: you and mr. garth have alwai been so kind 
me. howev, it’s no us sai that. you will alwai think me a 
now.”

fred turn round and hurri out of the room, consciou that he 
get rather womanish, and feel confusedli that hi be 
wa not of much us to the garth. thei could see him mount, 
quickli pass through the gate.

“i am disappoint in fred vinci,” said mr. garth. “i would not 
believ beforehand that he would have drawn you into hi debt. i 
he wa extravag, but i did not think that he would be so mean as 
hang hi risk on hi oldest friend, who could the least afford 
lose.”

“i wa a fool, susan.”

“that you were,” said the wife, nod and smile. “but i should 
have gone to publish it in the market-place. why should you keep 
thing from me? it is just so with your button: you let them burst 
without tell me, and go out with your wristband hang. if i 
onli known i might have been readi with some better plan.”

“you ar sadli cut up, i know, susan,” said caleb, look feelingli 
her. “i can’t abid your lose the monei you’ve scrape togeth 
alfr.”

“it is veri well that i _had_ scrape it togeth; and it is you 
will have to suffer, for you must teach the boi yourself. you must 
up your bad habit. some men take to drink, and you have taken 
work without pai. you must indulg yourself a littl less in that.
and you must ride over to mari, and ask the child what monei she ha.”

caleb had push hi chair back, and wa lean forward, shake 
head slowli, and fit hi finger-tip togeth with much niceti.

“poor mari!” he said. “susan,” he went on in a lower tone, “i’
afraid she mai be fond of fred.”

“oh no! she alwai laugh at him; and he is not like to think of 
in ani other than a brotherli wai.”

caleb made no rejoind, but present lower hi spectacl, drew 
hi chair to the desk, and said, “deuc take the bill—i wish it wa 
hanov! these thing ar a sad interrupt to busi!”

the first part of thi speech compris hi whole store of 
express, and wa utter with a slight snarl easi to imagin. but 
would be difficult to convei to those who never heard him utter 
word “busi,” the peculiar tone of fervid vener, of 
regard, in which he wrap it, as a consecr symbol is wrap 
it gold-fring linen.

caleb garth often shook hi head in medit on the valu, 
indispens might of that myriad-head, myriad-hand labor by 
the social bodi is fed, cloth, and hous. it had laid hold of 
imagin in boyhood. the echo of the great hammer where roof 
keel were a-make, the signal-shout of the workmen, the roar of 
furnac, the thunder and plash of the engin, were a sublim music 
him; the fell and lade of timber, and the huge trunk 
star-like in the distanc along the highwai, the crane at work on 
wharf, the pile-up produc in warehous, the precis and varieti 
muscular effort wherev exact work had to be turn out,—all 
sight of hi youth had act on him as poetri without the aid of 
poet, had made a philosophi for him without the aid of philosoph, 
religion without the aid of theologi. hi earli ambit had been 
have as effect a share as possibl in thi sublim labor, which 
peculiarli dignifi by him with the name of “busi;” and though 
had onli been a short time under a surveyor, and had been chiefli 
own teacher, he knew more of land, build, and mine than most 
the special men in the counti.

hi classif of human employ wa rather crude, and, like 
categori of more celebr men, would not be accept in 
advanc time. he divid them into “busi, polit, preach,
learn, and amus.” he had noth to sai against the last four;
but he regard them as a reverenti pagan regard other god 
hi own. in the same wai, he thought veri well of all rank, but 
would not himself have like to be of ani rank in which he had not 
close contact with “busi” as to get often honor decor 
mark of dust and mortar, the damp of the engin, or the sweet soil 
the wood and field. though he had never regard himself as 
than an orthodox christian, and would argu on preveni grace if 
subject were propos to him, i think hi virtual divin were 
practic scheme, accur work, and the faith complet 
undertak: hi princ of dark wa a slack workman. but there 
no spirit of denial in caleb, and the world seem so wondrou to 
that he wa readi to accept ani number of system, like ani number 
firmament, if thei did not obvious interfer with the 
land-drainag, solid build, correct measur, and judici 
(for coal). in fact, he had a reverenti soul with a strong 
intellig. but he could not manag financ: he knew valu well, 
he had no keen of imagin for monetari result in the shape 
profit and loss: and have ascertain thi to hi cost, he 
to give up all form of hi belov “busi” which requir 
talent. he gave himself up entir to the mani kind of work which 
could do without handl capit, and wa on of those preciou 
within hi own district whom everybodi would choos to work for them,
becaus he did hi work well, charg veri littl, and often 
to charg at all. it is no wonder, then, that the garth were poor, 
“live in a small wai.” howev, thei did not mind it.




chapter xxv.

“love seeketh not itself to pleas,
    nor for itself hath ani 
but for anoth give it 
    and build a heaven in hell’s despair.
. . . . . . .
love seeketh onli self to pleas,
    to bind anoth to it delight,
joi in anoth’s loss of eas,
    and build a hell in heaven’s despit.”
—w. blake: _song of experi_.


fred vinci want to arriv at stone court when mari could not 
him, and when hi uncl wa not downstair: in that case she might 
sit alon in the wainscot parlor. he left hi hors in the 
to avoid make a nois on the gravel in front, and enter the 
without other notic than the nois of the door-handl. mari wa in 
usual corner, laugh over mr. piozzi’s recollect of johnson, 
look up with the fun still in her face. it gradual fade as she 
fred approach her without speak, and stand befor her with hi 
on the mantel-piec, look ill. she too wa silent, onli rais 
ey to him inquiringli.

“mari,” he began, “i am a good-for-noth blackguard.”

“i should think on of those epithet would do at a time,” said mari,
try to smile, but feel alarm.

“i know you will never think well of me ani more. you will think me 
liar. you will think me dishonest. you will think i didn’t care 
you, or your father and mother. you alwai do make the worst of me, 
know.”

“i cannot deni that i shall think all that of you, fred, if you give 
good reason. but pleas to tell me at onc what you have done. i 
rather know the pain truth than imagin it.”

“i ow monei—a hundr and sixti pound. i ask your father to 
hi name to a bill. i thought it would not signifi to him. i made 
of pai the monei myself, and i have tri as hard as i could. 
now, i have been so unlucki—a hors ha turn out badli—i can onli 
fifti pound. and i can’t ask my father for the monei: he would 
give me a farth. and my uncl gave me a hundr a littl while ago.
so what can i do? and now your father ha no readi monei to spare, 
your mother will have to pai awai her nineti-two pound that she 
save, and she sai your save must go too. you see what a—”

“oh, poor mother, poor father!” said mari, her ey fill with tear,
and a littl sob rise which she tri to repress. she look 
befor her and took no notic of fred, all the consequ at 
becom present to her. he too remain silent for some moment,
feel more miser than ever. “i wouldn’t have hurt you for 
world, mari,” he said at last. “you can never forgiv me.”

“what doe it matter whether i forgiv you?” said mari, passion.
“would that make it ani better for my mother to lose the monei she 
been earn by lesson for four year, that she might send alfr 
mr. hanmer’s? should you think all that pleasant enough if i 
you?”

“sai what you like, mari. i deserv it all.”

“i don’t want to sai anyth,” said mari, more quietli, “and my 
is of no us.” she dri her ey, threw asid her book, rose 
fetch her sew.

fred follow her with hi ey, hope that thei would meet her, 
in that wai find access for hi implor penit. but no! mari 
easili avoid look upward.

“i do care about your mother’s monei go,” he said, when she 
seat again and sew quickli. “i want to ask you, mari—don’t 
think that mr. featherston—if you were to tell him—tell him, i mean,
about apprent alfr—would advanc the monei?”

“my famili is not fond of beg, fred. we would rather work for 
monei. besid, you sai that mr. featherston ha late given you 
hundr pound. he rare make present; he ha never made present 
us. i am sure my father will not ask him for anyth; and even if 
chose to beg of him, it would be of no us.”

“i am so miser, mari—if you knew how miser i am, you would 
sorri for me.”

“there ar other thing to be more sorri for than that. but 
peopl alwai think their own discomfort of more import 
anyth els in the world. i see enough of that everi dai.”

“it is hardli fair to call me selfish. if you knew what thing 
young men do, you would think me a good wai off the worst.”

“i know that peopl who spend a great deal of monei on 
without know how thei shall pai, must be selfish. thei ar 
think of what thei can get for themselv, and not of what 
peopl mai lose.”

“ani man mai be unfortun, mari, and find himself unabl to pai 
he meant it. there is not a better man in the world than your father,
and yet he got into troubl.”

“how dare you make ani comparison between my father and you, fred?”
said mari, in a deep tone of indign. “he never got into troubl 
think of hi own idl pleasur, but becaus he wa alwai 
of the work he wa do for other peopl. and he ha fare hard, 
work hard to make good everybodi’s loss.”

“and you think that i shall never try to make good anyth, mari. 
is not gener to believ the worst of a man. when you have got 
power over him, i think you might try and us it to make him better;
but that is what you never do. howev, i’m go,” fred end,
languidli. “i shall never speak to you about anyth again. i’m 
sorri for all the troubl i’ve caus—that’s all.”

mari had drop her work out of her hand and look up. there is 
someth matern even in a girlish love, and mari’s hard 
had wrought her natur to an impress veri differ from 
hard slight thing which we call girlish. at fred’s last word 
felt an instantan pang, someth like what a mother feel at 
imagin sob or cri of her naughti truant child, which mai 
itself and get harm. and when, look up, her ey met hi 
despair glanc, her piti for him surmount her anger and all 
other anxieti.

“oh, fred, how ill you look! sit down a moment. don’t go yet. let 
tell uncl that you ar here. he ha been wonder that he ha 
seen you for a whole week.” mari spoke hurriedli, sai the word 
came first without know veri well what thei were, but sai them 
a half-sooth half-beseech tone, and rise as if to go awai 
mr. featherston. of cours fred felt as if the cloud had part and 
gleam had come: he move and stood in her wai.

“sai on word, mari, and i will do anyth. sai you will not think 
worst of me—will not give me up altogeth.”

“as if it were ani pleasur to me to think ill of you,” said mari, in 
mourn tone. “as if it were not veri pain to me to see you an 
frivol creatur. how can you bear to be so contempt, when 
ar work and strive, and there ar so mani thing to be done—
can you bear to be fit for noth in the world that is us? 
with so much good in your disposit, fred,—you might be worth a 
deal.”

“i will try to be anyth you like, mari, if you will sai that 
love me.”

“i should be asham to sai that i love a man who must alwai 
hang on other, and reckon on what thei would do for him. 
will you be when you ar forti? like mr. bowyer, i suppos—just 
idl, live in mr. beck’s front parlor—fat and shabbi, 
somebodi will invit you to dinner—spend your morn in learn 
comic song—oh no! learn a tune on the flute.”

mari’s lip had begun to curl with a smile as soon as she had 
that question about fred’s futur (young soul ar mobil), and 
she end, her face had it full illumin of fun. to him it 
like the cessat of an ach that mari could laugh at him, and with 
passiv sort of smile he tri to reach her hand; but she slip 
quickli toward the door and said, “i shall tell uncl. you _must_ 
him for a moment or two.”

fred secretli felt that hi futur wa guarante against 
fulfil of mari’s sarcast propheci, apart from that “anyth”
which he wa readi to do if she would defin it. he never dare 
mari’s presenc to approach the subject of hi expect from mr.
featherston, and she alwai ignor them, as if everyth depend 
himself. but if ever he actual came into the properti, she 
recogn the chang in hi posit. all thi pass through hi 
somewhat languidli, befor he went up to see hi uncl. he stai but 
littl while, excus himself on the ground that he had a cold; 
mari did not reappear befor he left the hous. but as he rode home, 
began to be more consciou of be ill, than of be melancholi.

when caleb garth arriv at stone court soon after dusk, mari wa 
surpris, although he seldom had leisur for pai her a visit, 
wa not at all fond of have to talk with mr. featherston. the 
man, on the other hand, felt himself ill at eas with a brother-in-
whom he could not annoi, who did not mind about be consid poor,
had noth to ask of him, and understood all kind of farm 
mine busi better than he did. but mari had felt sure that 
parent would want to see her, and if her father had not come, 
would have obtain leav to go home for an hour or two the next dai.
after discuss price dure tea with mr. featherston, caleb rose 
bid him good-by, and said, “i want to speak to you, mari.”

she took a candl into anoth larg parlor, where there wa no fire,
and set down the feebl light on the dark mahogani tabl, 
round to her father, and put her arm round hi neck kiss 
with childish kiss which he delight in,—the express of hi 
brow soften as the express of a great beauti dog soften 
it is caress. mari wa hi favorit child, and whatev susan 
sai, and right as she wa on all other subject, caleb thought 
natur that fred or ani on els should think mari more lovabl 
other girl.

“i’ve got someth to tell you, my dear,” said caleb in hi 
wai. “no veri good new; but then it might be wors.”

“about monei, father? i think i know what it is.”

“ay? how can that be? you see, i’ve been a bit of a fool again, and 
my name to a bill, and now it come to pai; and your mother ha 
to part with her save, that’s the worst of it, and even thei won’
quit make thing even. we want a hundr and ten pound: your 
ha nineti-two, and i have none to spare in the bank; and she 
that you have some save.”

“oh ye; i have more than four-and-twenti pound. i thought you 
come, father, so i put it in my bag. see! beauti white note 
gold.”

mari took out the fold monei from her reticul and put it into 
father’s hand.

“well, but how—we onli want eighteen—here, put the rest back,
child,—but how did you know about it?” said caleb, who, in 
unconquer indiffer to monei, wa begin to be 
concern about the relat the affair might have to mari’
affect.

“fred told me thi morn.”

“ah! did he come on purpos?”

“ye, i think so. he wa a good deal distress.”

“i’m afraid fred is not to be trust, mari,” said the father, 
hesit tender. “he mean better than he act, perhap. but 
should think it a piti for ani bodi’s happi to be wrap up 
him, and so would your mother.”

“and so should i, father,” said mari, not look up, but put 
back of her father’s hand against her cheek.

“i don’t want to pry, my dear. but i wa afraid there might 
someth between you and fred, and i want to caution you. you see,
mari”—here caleb’s voic becam more tender; he had been push 
hat about on the tabl and look at it, but final he turn 
ey on hi daughter—“a woman, let her be as good as she mai, ha 
to put up with the life her husband make for her. your mother ha 
to put up with a good deal becaus of me.”

mari turn the back of her father’s hand to her lip and smile 
him.

“well, well, nobodi’s perfect, but”—here mr. garth shook hi head 
help out the inadequaci of word—“what i am think of is—what it 
be for a wife when she’s never sure of her husband, when he hasn’t 
a principl in him to make him more afraid of do the wrong thing 
other than of get hi own toe pinch. that’s the long and 
short of it, mari. young folk mai get fond of each other befor 
know what life is, and thei mai think it all holidai if thei can 
get togeth; but it soon turn into work dai, my dear. howev, 
have more sens than most, and you haven’t been kept in cotton-wool:
there mai be no occas for me to sai thi, but a father trembl 
hi daughter, and you ar all by yourself here.”

“don’t fear for me, father,” said mari, grave meet her father’
ey; “fred ha alwai been veri good to me; he is kind-heart 
affection, and not fals, i think, with all hi self-indulg. 
i will never engag myself to on who ha no manli independ, 
who goe on loiter awai hi time on the chanc that other 
provid for him. you and my mother have taught me too much pride 
that.”

“that’s right—that’s right. then i am easi,” said mr. garth, take 
hi hat. “but it’s hard to run awai with your earn, eh child.”

“father!” said mari, in her deepest tone of remonstr. “
pocket of love besid to them all at home,” wa her last 
befor he close the outer door on himself.

“i suppos your father want your earn,” said old mr.
featherston, with hi usual power of unpleas surmis, when 
return to him. “he make but a tight fit, i reckon. you’re of 
now; you ought to be save for yourself.”

“i consid my father and mother the best part of myself, sir,” 
mari, coldli.

mr. featherston grunt: he could not deni that an ordinari sort 
girl like her might be expect to be us, so he thought of 
rejoind, disagre enough to be alwai apropo. “if fred 
come to-morrow, now, don’t you keep him chatter: let him come up 
me.”




chapter xxvi.

he beat me and i rail at him: o worthi satisfact! would it 
otherwis—that i could beat him while he rail at me.—_troilu 
cressida_.


but fred did not go to stone court the next dai, for reason that 
quit peremptori. from those visit to unsanitari houndslei street 
search of diamond, he had brought back not onli a bad bargain 
hors-flesh, but the further misfortun of some ailment which for a 
or two had deem mere depress and headach, but which got so 
wors when he return from hi visit to stone court that, go 
the dine-room, he threw himself on the sofa, and in answer to 
mother’s anxiou question, said, “i feel veri ill: i think you 
send for wrench.”

wrench came, but did not apprehend anyth seriou, spoke of a “
derang,” and did not speak of come again on the morrow. he had 
due valu for the vinci’ hous, but the wariest men ar apt to 
dull by routin, and on worri morn will sometim go 
their busi with the zest of the daili bell-ringer. mr. wrench wa 
small, neat, biliou man, with a well-dress wig: he had a 
practic, an irasc temper, a lymphat wife and seven children; 
he wa alreadi rather late befor set out on a four-mile drive 
meet dr. minchin on the other side of tipton, the deceas of hick, 
rural practition, have increas middlemarch practic in 
direct. great statesmen err, and why not small medic men? mr.
wrench did not neglect send the usual white parcel, which thi 
had black and drastic content. their effect wa not allevi 
poor fred, who, howev, unwil as he said to believ that he 
“in for an ill,” rose at hi usual easi hour the next morn 
went down-stair mean to breakfast, but succeed in noth but 
sit and shiver by the fire. mr. wrench wa again sent for, 
wa gone on hi round, and mr. vinci see her darl’s 
look and gener miseri, began to cry and said she would send for dr.
spragu.

“oh, nonsens, mother! it’s noth,” said fred, put out hi 
dry hand to her, “i shall soon be all right. i must have taken cold 
that nasti damp ride.”

“mamma!” said rosamond, who wa seat near the window (the dine-
window look on that highli respect street call lowick gate),
“there is mr. lydgat, stop to speak to some on. if i were you 
would call him in. he ha cure ellen bulstrod. thei sai he 
everi on.”

mr. vinci sprang to the window and open it in an instant, 
onli of fred and not of medic etiquett. lydgat wa onli two 
off on the other side of some iron palisad, and turn round at 
sudden sound of the sash, befor she call to him. in two minut 
wa in the room, and rosamond went out, after wait just long 
to show a pretti anxieti conflict with her sens of what 
becom.

lydgat had to hear a narr in which mr. vinci’s mind 
with remark instinct on everi point of minor import, 
on what mr. wrench had said and had not said about come again. 
there might be an awkward affair with wrench, lydgat saw at onc; 
the case wa seriou enough to make him dismiss that consider: 
wa convinc that fred wa in the pink-skin stage of typhoid fever,
and that he had taken just the wrong medicin. he must go to 
immedi, must have a regular nurs, and variou applianc 
precaut must be us, about which lydgat wa particular. poor mr.
vinci’s terror at these indic of danger found vent in such 
as came most easili. she thought it “veri ill usag on the part of mr.
wrench, who had attend their hous so mani year in prefer to mr.
peacock, though mr. peacock wa equal a friend. why mr. wrench 
neglect her children more than other, she could not for the life 
her understand. he had not neglect mr. larcher’s when thei had 
measl, nor inde would mr. vinci have wish that he should. and 
anyth should happen—”

here poor mr. vinci’s spirit quit broke down, and her niob 
and good-humor face were sadli convuls. thi wa in the hall out 
fred’s hear, but rosamond had open the draw-room door, and 
came forward anxious. lydgat apolog for mr. wrench, said 
the symptom yesterdai might have been disguis, and that thi 
of fever wa veri equivoc in it begin: he would go 
to the druggist’s and have a prescript made up in order to lose 
time, but he would write to mr. wrench and tell him what had been done.

“but you must come again—you must go on attend fred. i can’t have 
boi left to anybodi who mai come or not. i bear nobodi ill-will, 
god, and mr. wrench save me in the pleurisi, but he’d better have 
me die—if—if—”

“i will meet mr. wrench here, then, shall i?” said lydgat, 
believ that wrench wa not well prepar to deal wise with a 
of thi kind.

“prai make that arrang, mr. lydgat,” said rosamond, come to 
mother’s aid, and support her arm to lead her awai.

when mr. vinci came home he wa veri angri with wrench, and did 
care if he never came into hi hous again. lydgat should go on now,
whether wrench like it or not. it wa no joke to have fever in 
hous. everybodi must be sent to now, not to come to dinner 
thursdai. and pritchard needn’t get up ani wine: brandi wa the 
thing against infect. “i shall drink brandi,” ad mr. vinci,
emphat—as much as to sai, thi wa not an occas for 
with blank-cartridg. “he’s an uncommonli unfortun lad, is fred.
he’d need have some luck by and by to make up for all thi—els i don’
know who’d have an eldest son.”

“don’t sai so, vinci,” said the mother, with a quiver lip, “if 
don’t want him to be taken from me.”

“it will worret you to death, luci; _that_ i can see,” said mr. vinci,
more mildli. “howev, wrench shall know what i think of the matter.”
(what mr. vinci thought confusedli wa, that the fever might 
have been hinder if wrench had shown the proper solicitud 
hi—the mayor’s—famili.) “i’m the last man to give in to the cry 
new doctor, or new parson either—whether thei’re bulstrod’s men 
not. but wrench shall know what i think, take it as he will.”

wrench did not take it at all well. lydgat wa as polit as he 
be in hi offhand wai, but polit in a man who ha place you at 
disadvantag is onli an addit exasper, especi if 
happen to have been an object of dislik beforehand. 
practition us to be an irrit speci, suscept on the 
of honor; and mr. wrench wa on of the most irrit among them. 
did not refus to meet lydgat in the even, but hi temper 
somewhat tri on the occas. he had to hear mr. vinci sai—

“oh, mr. wrench, what have i ever done that you should us me so?— 
go awai, and never to come again! and my boi might have been 
a corps!”

mr. vinci, who had been keep up a sharp fire on the enemi infect,
and wa a good deal heat in consequ, start up when he 
wrench come in, and went into the hall to let him know what he thought.

“i’ll tell you what, wrench, thi is beyond a joke,” said the mayor,
who of late had had to rebuk offend with an offici air, and 
broaden himself by put hi thumb in hi armhol. “to let 
get unawar into a hous like thi. there ar some thing that 
to be action, and ar not so— that’s my opinion.”

but irrat reproach were easier to bear than the sens of 
instruct, or rather the sens that a younger man, like lydgat,
inwardli consid him in need of instruct, for “in point of fact,”
mr. wrench afterward said, lydgat parad flighti, foreign notion,
which would not wear. he swallow hi ir for the moment, but 
afterward wrote to declin further attend in the case. the 
might be a good on, but mr. wrench wa not go to truckl to 
on a profession matter. he reflect, with much probabl on 
side, that lydgat would by-and-by be caught trip too, and that 
ungentlemanli attempt to discredit the sale of drug by 
profession brethren, would by-and-by recoil on himself. he threw 
bite remark on lydgat’s trick, worthi onli of a quack, to 
himself a factiti reput with credul peopl. that cant 
cure wa never got up by sound practition.

thi wa a point on which lydgat smart as much as wrench 
desir. to be puf by ignor wa not onli humili, 
peril, and not more enviabl than the reput of 
weather-prophet. he wa impati of the foolish expect 
which all work must be carri on, and like enough to damag 
as much as mr. wrench could wish, by an unprofession open.

howev, lydgat wa instal as medic attend on the vinci, 
the event wa a subject of gener convers in middlemarch. 
said, that the vinci had behav scandal, that mr. vinci 
threaten wrench, and that mr. vinci had accus him of poison 
son. other were of opinion that mr. lydgat’s pass by 
providenti, that he wa wonderfulli clever in fever, and 
bulstrod wa in the right to bring him forward. mani peopl 
that lydgat’s come to the town at all wa realli due to bulstrod;
and mr. taft, who wa alwai count stitch and gather 
inform in mislead fragment caught between the row of 
knit, had got it into her head that mr. lydgat wa a natur 
of bulstrod’s, a fact which seem to justifi her suspicion 
evangel laymen.

she on dai commun thi piec of knowledg to mr. farebroth,
who did not fail to tell her son of it, observ—

“i should not be surpris at anyth in bulstrod, but i should 
sorri to think it of mr. lydgat.”

“why, mother,” said mr. farebroth, after an explos laugh, “
know veri well that lydgat is of a good famili in the north. he 
heard of bulstrod befor he came here.”

“that is satisfactori so far as mr. lydgat is concern, camden,” 
the old ladi, with an air of precis.—“but as to bulstrod—the 
mai be true of some other son.”




chapter xxvii.

let the high muse chant love olympian:
we ar but mortal, and must sing of man.


an emin philosoph among my friend, who can dignifi even your 
furnitur by lift it into the seren light of scienc, ha shown 
thi pregnant littl fact. your pier-glass or extens surfac 
polish steel made to be rub by a housemaid, will be minut 
multitudin scratch in all direct; but place now against it 
light candl as a centr of illumin, and lo! the scratch 
seem to arrang themselv in a fine seri of concentr circl 
that littl sun. it is demonstr that the scratch ar 
everywher imparti and it is onli your candl which produc 
flatter illus of a concentr arrang, it light fall 
an exclus optic select. these thing ar a parabl. 
scratch ar event, and the candl is the egoism of ani person 
absent—of miss vinci, for exampl. rosamond had a provid of her 
who had kindli made her more charm than other girl, and who 
to have arrang fred’s ill and mr. wrench’s mistak in order 
bring her and lydgat within effect proxim. it would have been 
contraven these arrang if rosamond had consent to go awai 
stone court or elsewher, as her parent wish her to do, 
sinc mr. lydgat thought the precaut needless. therefor, 
miss morgan and the children were sent awai to a farmhous the 
after fred’s ill had declar itself, rosamond refus to 
papa and mamma.

poor mamma inde wa an object to touch ani creatur born of woman;
and mr. vinci, who dote on hi wife, wa more alarm on her 
than on fred’s. but for hi insist she would have taken no rest:
her bright wa all bedim; unconsci of her costum which 
alwai been so fresh and gai, she wa like a sick bird with languid 
and plumag ruffl, her sens dull to the sight and sound 
us most to interest her. fred’s delirium, in which he seem to 
wander out of her reach, tore her heart. after her first 
against mr. wrench she went about veri quietli: her on low cry wa 
lydgat. she would follow him out of the room and put her hand on 
arm moan out, “save my boi.” onc she plead, “he ha alwai 
good to me, mr. lydgat: he never had a hard word for hi mother,”—
if poor fred’s suffer were an accus against him. all 
deepest fibr of the mother’s memori were stir, and the young 
whose voic took a gentler tone when he spoke to her, wa on with 
babe whom she had love, with a love new to her, befor he wa born.

“i have good hope, mr. vinci,” lydgat would sai. “come down with 
and let us talk about the food.” in that wai he led her to the 
where rosamond wa, and made a chang for her, surpris her 
take some tea or broth which had been prepar for her. there wa 
constant understand between him and rosamond on these matter. 
almost alwai saw her befor go to the sickroom, and she appeal 
him as to what she could do for mamma. her presenc of mind 
adroit in carri out hi hint were admir, and it is 
wonder that the idea of see rosamond began to mingl itself 
hi interest in the case. especi when the critic stage 
pass, and he began to feel confid of fred’s recoveri. in the 
doubt time, he had advis call in dr. spragu (who, if he could,
would rather have remain neutral on wrench’s account); but after 
consult, the conduct of the case wa left to lydgat, and 
wa everi reason to make him assidu. morn and even he wa 
mr. vinci’s, and gradual the visit becam cheer as fred 
simpli feebl, and lai not onli in need of the utmost pet 
consciou of it, so that mr. vinci felt as if, after all, the 
had made a festiv for her tender.

both father and mother held it an ad reason for good spirit, 
old mr. featherston sent messag by lydgat, sai that fred 
make hast and get well, as he, peter featherston, could not 
without him, and miss hi visit sadli. the old man himself 
get bedridden. mr. vinci told these messag to fred when he 
listen, and he turn toward her hi delic, pinch face, 
which all the thick blond hair had been cut awai, and in which the 
seem to have got larger, yearn for some word about mari—
what she felt about hi ill. no word pass hi lip; but “to 
with ey belong to love’s rare wit,” and the mother in the ful 
her heart not onli divin fred’s long, but felt readi for 
sacrific in order to satisfi him.

“if i can onli see my boi strong again,” she said, in her love folli;
“and who know?—perhap master of stone court! and he can marri 
he like then.”

“not if thei won’t have me, mother,” said fred. the ill had 
him childish, and tear came as he spoke.

“oh, take a bit of jelli, my dear,” said mr. vinci, 
incredul of ani such refus.

she never left fred’s side when her husband wa not in the hous, 
thu rosamond wa in the unusu posit of be much alon. lydgat,
natur, never thought of stai long with her, yet it seem 
the brief imperson convers thei had togeth were creat 
peculiar intimaci which consist in shyness. thei were oblig to 
at each other in speak, and somehow the look could not be 
through as the matter of cours which it realli wa. lydgat began 
feel thi sort of conscious unpleas and on dai look down, 
anywher, like an ill-work puppet. but thi turn out badli: 
next dai, rosamond look down, and the consequ wa that when 
ey met again, both were more consciou than befor. there wa no 
for thi in scienc, and as lydgat did not want to flirt, there 
to be no help for it in folli. it wa therefor a relief when 
no longer consid the hous in quarantin, and when the chanc 
see rosamond alon were veri much reduc.

but that intimaci of mutual embarrass, in which each feel that 
other is feel someth, have onc exist, it effect is not 
be done awai with. talk about the weather and other well-bred topic 
apt to seem a hollow devic, and behavior can hardli becom easi 
it frankli recogn a mutual fascin—which of cours need 
mean anyth deep or seriou. thi wa the wai in which rosamond 
lydgat slid gracefulli into eas, and made their intercours 
again. visitor came and went as usual, there wa onc more music 
the draw-room, and all the extra hospit of mr. vinci’
mayoralti return. lydgat, whenev he could, took hi seat 
rosamond’s side, and linger to hear her music, call himself 
captiv—mean, all the while, not to be her captiv. 
preposter of the notion that he could at onc set up 
satisfactori establish as a marri man wa a suffici 
against danger. thi plai at be a littl in love wa agreeabl, 
did not interfer with graver pursuit. flirtat, after all, wa 
necessarili a sing process. rosamond, for her part, had 
enjoi the dai so much in her life befor: she wa sure of 
admir by some on worth captiv, and she did not 
flirtat from love, either in herself or in anoth. she seem to 
sail with a fair wind just whither she would go, and her 
were much occupi with a handsom hous in lowick gate which she 
would by-and-by be vacant. she wa quit determin, when she 
marri, to rid herself adroitli of all the visitor who were 
agreeabl to her at her father’s; and she imagin the draw-room 
her favorit hous with variou style of furnitur.

certainli her thought were much occupi with lydgat himself; 
seem to her almost perfect: if he had known hi note so that 
enchant under her music had been less like an emot eleph’s,
and if he had been abl to discrimin better the refin of 
tast in dress, she could hardli have mention a defici in him.
how differ he wa from young plymdal or mr. caiu larcher! 
young men had not a notion of french, and could speak on no 
with strike knowledg, except perhap the dye and carri trade,
which of cours thei were asham to mention; thei were 
gentri, elat with their silver-head whip and satin stock, 
embarrass in their manner, and timidli jocos: even fred wa 
them, have at least the accent and manner of a univers man.
wherea lydgat wa alwai listen to, bore himself with the 
polit of consciou superior, and seem to have the 
cloth on by a certain natur affin, without ever have to 
about them. rosamond wa proud when he enter the room, and when 
approach her with a distinguish smile, she had a delici 
that she wa the object of enviabl homag. if lydgat had been 
of all the pride he excit in that delic bosom, he might have 
just as well pleas as ani other man, even the most dens 
of humor patholog or fibrou tissu: he held it on of the 
attitud of the feminin mind to ador a man’s pre-emin 
too precis a knowledg of what it consist in. but rosamond wa 
on of those helpless girl who betrai themselv unawar, and 
behavior is awkwardli driven by their impuls, instead of 
steer by wari grace and proprieti. do you imagin that her 
forecast and rumin concern hous-furnitur and societi 
ever discern in her convers, even with her mamma? on 
contrari, she would have express the prettiest surpris 
disapprob if she had heard that anoth young ladi had 
detect in that immodest prematur—inde, would probabl 
disbeliev in it possibl. for rosamond never show 
unbecom knowledg, and wa alwai that combin of 
sentiment, music, danc, draw, eleg note-write, 
album for extract vers, and perfect blond loveli, which made 
irresist woman for the doom man of that date. think no 
evil of her, prai: she had no wick plot, noth sordid 
mercenari; in fact, she never thought of monei except as 
necessari which other peopl would alwai provid. she wa not in 
habit of devis falsehood, and if her statement were no direct 
to fact, why, thei were not intend in that light—thei were among 
eleg accomplish, intend to pleas. natur had inspir 
art in finish mr. lemon’s favorit pupil, who by gener 
(fred’s except) wa a rare compound of beauti, clever, 
amiabl.

lydgat found it more and more agreeabl to be with her, and there 
no constraint now, there wa a delight interchang of influenc 
their ey, and what thei said had that superflu of mean 
them, which is observ with some sens of flat by a 
person; still thei had no interview or asid from which a 
person need have been exclud. in fact, thei flirt; and lydgat 
secur in the belief that thei did noth els. if a man could 
love and be wise, sure he could flirt and be wise at the same time?
realli, the men in middlemarch, except mr. farebroth, were 
bore, and lydgat did not care about commerci polit or card:
what wa he to do for relax? he wa often invit to 
bulstrod’; but the girl there were hardli out of the schoolroom; 
mr. bulstrod’s _naiv_ wai of concili pieti and worldli, 
nothing of thi life and the desir of cut glass, 
conscious at onc of filthi rag and the best damask, wa not 
suffici relief from the weight of her husband’s 
serious. the vinci’ hous, with all it fault, wa the 
by contrast; besid, it nourish rosamond—sweet to look at as 
half-open blush-rose, and adorn with accomplish for 
refin amus of man.

but he made some enemi, other than medic, by hi success with 
vinci. on even he came into the draw-room rather late, 
sever other visitor were there. the card-tabl had drawn off 
elder, and mr. ned plymdal (on of the good match in middlemarch,
though not on of it lead mind) wa in _tête-à-tête_ 
rosamond. he had brought the last “keepsak,” the gorgeou water-
public which mark modern progress at that time; and 
consid himself veri fortun that he could be the first to 
over it with her, dwell on the ladi and gentlemen with 
copper-plate cheek and copper-plate smile, and point to 
vers as capit and sentiment stori as interest. rosamond 
graciou, and mr. ned wa satisfi that he had the veri best thing 
art and literatur as a medium for “pai address”—the veri thing 
pleas a nice girl. he had also reason, deep rather than ostens,
for be satisfi with hi own appear. to superfici 
hi chin had too vanish an aspect, look as if it were 
gradual reabsorb. and it did inde caus him some difficulti 
the fit of hi satin stock, for which chin were at that time us.

“i think the honor mr. s. is someth like you,” said mr. ned. 
kept the book open at the bewitch portrait, and look at it 
languishingli.

“her back is veri larg; she seem to have sat for that,” 
rosamond, not mean ani satir, but think how red young plymdal’
hand were, and wonder why lydgat did not come. she went on 
her tat all the while.

“i did not sai she wa as beauti as you ar,” said mr. ned,
ventur to look from the portrait to it rival.

“i suspect you of be an adroit flatter,” said rosamond, 
sure that she should have to reject thi young gentleman a second time.

but now lydgat came in; the book wa close befor he 
rosamond’s corner, and as he took hi seat with easi confid on 
other side of her, young plymdal’s jaw fell like a baromet 
the cheerless side of chang. rosamond enjoi not onli lydgat’
presenc but it effect: she like to excit jealousi.

“what a late comer you ar!” she said, as thei shook hand. “mamma 
given you up a littl while ago. how do you find fred?”

“as usual; go on well, but slowli. i want him to go awai—to 
court, for exampl. but your mamma seem to have some object.”

“poor fellow!” said rosamond, prettili. “you will see fred so chang,”
she ad, turn to the other suitor; “we have look to mr. 
as our guardian angel dure thi ill.”

mr. ned smile nervous, while lydgat, draw the “keepsak” 
him and open it, gave a short scorn laugh and toss up hi chin,
as if in wonder at human folli.

“what ar you laugh at so profan?” said rosamond, with 
neutral.

“i wonder which would turn out to be the silliest—the engrav or 
write here,” said lydgat, in hi most convinc tone, while 
turn over the page quickli, seem to see all through the book 
no time, and show hi larg white hand to much advantag, 
rosamond thought. “do look at thi bridegroom come out of church: 
you ever see such a ‘sugar invent’—as the elizabethan us 
sai? did ani haberdash ever look so smirk? yet i will answer 
it the stori make him on of the first gentlemen in the land.”

“you ar so sever, i am frighten at you,” said rosamond, keep 
amus duli moder. poor young plymdal had linger 
admir over thi veri engrav, and hi spirit wa stir.

“there ar a great mani celebr peopl write in the ‘keepsak,’ 
all event,” he said, in a tone at onc piqu and timid. “thi is 
first time i have heard it call silli.”

“i think i shall turn round on you and accus you of be a goth,”
said rosamond, look at lydgat with a smile. “i suspect you 
noth about ladi blessington and l. e. l.” rosamond herself wa 
without relish for these writer, but she did not readili 
herself by admir, and wa aliv to the slightest hint 
anyth wa not, accord to lydgat, in the veri highest tast.

“but sir walter scott—i suppos mr. lydgat know him,” said 
plymdal, a littl cheer by thi advantag.

“oh, i read no literatur now,” said lydgat, shut the book, 
push it awai. “i read so much when i wa a lad, that i suppos 
will last me all my life. i us to know scott’s poem by heart.”

“i should like to know when you left off,” said rosamond, “becaus 
i might be sure that i knew someth which you did not know.”

“mr. lydgat would sai that wa not worth know,” said mr. ned,
purpos caustic.

“on the contrari,” said lydgat, show no smart; but smile 
exasper confid at rosamond. “it would be worth know by 
fact that miss vinci could tell it me.”

young plymdal soon went to look at the whist-plai, think 
lydgat wa on of the most conceit, unpleas fellow it had 
been hi ill-fortun to meet.

“how rash you ar!” said rosamond, inwardli delight. “do you see 
you have given offenc?”

“what! is it mr. plymdal’s book? i am sorri. i didn’t think about it.”

“i shall begin to admit what you said of yourself when you first 
here—that you ar a bear, and want teach by the bird.”

“well, there is a bird who can teach me what she will. don’t i 
to her willingli?”

to rosamond it seem as if she and lydgat were as good as engag.
that thei were some time to be engag had long been an idea in 
mind; and idea, we know, tend to a more solid kind of exist, 
necessari materi be at hand. it is true, lydgat had 
counter-idea of remain unengag; but thi wa a mere neg, 
shadow cast by other resolv which themselv were capabl 
shrink. circumst wa almost sure to be on the side of rosamond’
idea, which had a shape activ and look through watch 
ey, wherea lydgat’s lai blind and unconcern as a jelli-fish 
get melt without know it.

that even when he went home, he look at hi phial to see how 
process of macer wa go on, with undisturb interest; and 
wrote out hi daili note with as much precis as usual. the 
from which it wa difficult for him to detach himself were 
construct of someth els than rosamond’s virtu, and 
primit tissu wa still hi fair unknown. moreov, he wa 
to feel some zest for the grow though half-suppress feud 
him and the other medic men, which wa like to becom 
manifest, now that bulstrod’s method of manag the new hospit 
about to be declar; and there were variou inspirit sign that 
non-accept by some of peacock’s patient might be 
by the impress he had produc in other quarter. onli a few 
later, when he had happen to overtak rosamond on the lowick road 
had got down from hi hors to walk by her side until he had 
protect her from a pass drove, he had been stop by a servant 
horseback with a messag call him in to a hous of some 
where peacock had never attend; and it wa the second instanc 
thi kind. the servant wa sir jame chettam’s, and the hous 
lowick manor.




chapter xxviii.

1_st gent_. all time ar good to seek your wed 
    bring a mutual delight.

2_d gent_. why, true.
    the calendar hath not an evil 
    for soul made on by love, and even 
    were sweet, if it came like roll 
    while thei two clasp each other, and 
    no life apart.


mr. and mr. casaubon, return from their wed journei, arriv 
lowick manor in the middl of januari. a light snow wa fall as 
descend at the door, and in the morn, when dorothea pass 
her dress-room into the blue-green boudoir that we know of, she 
the long avenu of lime lift their trunk from a white earth, 
spread white branch against the dun and motionless sky. 
distant flat shrank in uniform white and low-hang uniform 
cloud. the veri furnitur in the room seem to have shrunk sinc 
saw it befor: the stag in the tapestri look more like a ghost in 
ghostli blue-green world; the volum of polit literatur in 
bookcas look more like immov imit of book. the 
fire of dry oak-bough burn on the log seem an 
renew of life and glow—like the figur of dorothea herself as 
enter carri the red-leather case contain the cameo for celia.

she wa glow from her morn toilet as onli health youth 
glow: there wa gem-like bright on her coil hair and in her 
ey; there wa warm red life in her lip; her throat had a 
white abov the differ white of the fur which itself seem 
wind about her neck and cling down her blue-grai peliss with 
tender gather from her own, a sentient commingl innoc 
kept it loveli against the crystallin puriti of the outdoor snow.
as she laid the cameo-case on the tabl in the bow-window, 
unconsci kept her hand on them, immedi absorb in 
out on the still, white enclosur which made her visibl world.

mr. casaubon, who had risen earli complain of palpit, wa 
the librari give audienc to hi curat mr. tucker. by-and-by 
would come in her qualiti of bridesmaid as well as sister, and 
the next week there would be wed visit receiv and given; all 
continu of that transit life understood to correspond with 
excit of bridal felic, and keep up the sens of 
ineffect, as of a dream which the dreamer begin to suspect. 
duti of her marri life, contempl as so great beforehand, 
to be shrink with the furnitur and the white vapor-
landscap. the clear height where she expect to walk in 
communion had becom difficult to see even in her imagin; 
delici repos of the soul on a complet superior had been 
into uneasi effort and alarm with dim presenti. when would 
dai begin of that activ wife devot which wa to strengthen 
husband’s life and exalt her own? never perhap, as she 
preconceiv them; but somehow—still somehow. in thi solemnli 
union of her life, duti would present itself in some new form 
inspir and give a new mean to wife love.

meanwhil there wa the snow and the low arch of dun vapor—there 
the stifl oppress of that gentlewoman’s world, where 
wa done for her and none ask for her aid—where the sens 
connect with a manifold pregnant exist had to be kept 
painfulli as an inward vision, instead of come from without in 
that would have shape her energi.— “what shall i do?” “whatev 
pleas, my dear:” that had been her brief histori sinc she had 
off learn morn lesson and practis silli rhythm on the 
piano. marriag, which wa to bring guidanc into worthi and 
occup, had not yet freed her from the gentlewoman’s 
liberti: it had not even fill her leisur with the rumin joi 
uncheck tender. her bloom full-puls youth stood there in 
moral imprison which made itself on with the chill, colorless,
narrow landscap, with the shrunken furnitur, the never-read book,
and the ghostli stag in a pale fantast world that seem to 
vanish from the daylight.

in the first minut when dorothea look out she felt noth but 
dreari oppress; then came a keen remembr, and turn awai 
the window she walk round the room. the idea and hope which 
live in her mind when she first saw thi room nearli three 
befor were present now onli as memori: she judg them as we 
transient and depart thing. all exist seem to beat with 
lower puls than her own, and her religi faith wa a solitari cry,
the struggl out of a nightmar in which everi object wa wither 
shrink awai from her. each rememb thing in the room 
disench, wa deaden as an unlit transpar, till her 
gaze came to the group of miniatur, and there at last she 
someth which had gather new breath and mean: it wa 
miniatur of mr. casaubon’s aunt julia, who had made the 
marriag—of will ladislaw’s grandmoth. dorothea could fanci that 
wa aliv now—the delic woman’s face which yet had a 
look, a peculiar difficult to interpret. wa it onli her friend 
thought her marriag unfortun? or did she herself find it out to 
a mistak, and tast the salt bitter of her tear in the 
silenc of the night? what breadth of experi dorothea seem 
have pass over sinc she first look at thi miniatur! she felt 
new companionship with it, as if it had an ear for her and could 
how she wa look at it. here wa a woman who had known 
difficulti about marriag. nai, the color deepen, the lip and 
seem to get larger, the hair and ey seem to be send out light,
the face wa masculin and beam on her with that full gaze 
tell her on whom it fall that she is too interest for 
slightest movement of her eyelid to pass unnot and uninterpret.
the vivid present came like a pleasant glow to dorothea: she 
herself smile, and turn from the miniatur sat down and look 
as if she were again talk to a figur in front of her. but the 
disappear as she went on medit, and at last she said aloud—

“oh, it wa cruel to speak so! how sad—how dread!”

she rose quickli and went out of the room, hurri along the corridor,
with the irresist impuls to go and see her husband and inquir 
she could do anyth for him. perhap mr. tucker wa gone and mr.
casaubon wa alon in the librari. she felt as if all her morn’
gloom would vanish if she could see her husband glad becaus of 
presenc.

but when she reach the head of the dark oak there wa celia 
up, and below there wa mr. brook, exchang welcom 
congratul with mr. casaubon.

“dodo!” said celia, in her quiet staccato; then kiss her sister,
whose arm encircl her, and said no more. i think thei both cri 
littl in a furtiv manner, while dorothea ran down-stair to greet 
uncl.

“i need not ask how you ar, my dear,” said mr. brook, after 
her forehead. “rome ha agre with you, i see—happi, fresco, 
antiqu—that sort of thing. well, it’s veri pleasant to have you 
again, and you understand all about art now, eh? but casaubon is 
littl pale, i tell him—a littl pale, you know. studi hard in 
holidai is carri it rather too far. i overdid it at on time”—mr.
brook still held dorothea’s hand, but had turn hi face to mr.
casaubon—“about topographi, ruin, templ—i thought i had a clew, 
i saw it would carri me too far, and noth might come of it. you 
go ani length in that sort of thing, and noth mai come of it, 
know.”

dorothea’s ey also were turn up to her husband’s face with 
anxieti at the idea that those who saw him afresh after absenc 
be awar of sign which she had not notic.

“noth to alarm you, my dear,” said mr. brook, observ 
express. “a littl english beef and mutton will soon make 
differ. it wa all veri well to look pale, sit for the 
of aquina, you know—we got your letter just in time. but aquina,
now—he wa a littl too subtl, wasn’t he? doe anybodi read aquina?”

“he is not inde an author adapt to superfici mind,” said mr.
casaubon, meet these time question with dignifi patienc.

“you would like coffe in your own room, uncl?” said dorothea, 
to the rescu.

“ye; and you must go to celia: she ha great new to tell you, 
know. i leav it all to her.”

the blue-green boudoir look much more cheer when celia wa 
there in a peliss exactli like her sister’s, survei the cameo 
a placid satisfact, while the convers pass on to 
topic.

“do you think it nice to go to rome on a wed journei?” said celia,
with her readi delic blush which dorothea wa us to on 
smallest occas.

“it would not suit all—not you, dear, for exampl,” said dorothea,
quietli. no on would ever know what she thought of a wed 
to rome.

“mr. cadwallad sai it is nonsens, peopl go a long journei 
thei ar marri. she sai thei get tire to death of each other, 
can’t quarrel comfort, as thei would at home. and ladi chettam 
she went to bath.” celia’s color chang again and again—

“to come and go with tide from the heart,
as it a run messeng had been.”


it must mean more than celia’s blush usual did.

“celia! ha someth happen?” said dorothea, in a tone full 
sisterli feel. “have you realli ani great new to tell me?”

“it wa becaus you went awai, dodo. then there wa nobodi but me 
sir jame to talk to,” said celia, with a certain roguish in 
ey.

“i understand. it is as i us to hope and believ,” said dorothea,
take her sister’s face between her hand, and look at her 
anxious. celia’s marriag seem more seriou than it us to do.

“it wa onli three dai ago,” said celia. “and ladi chettam is 
kind.”

“and you ar veri happi?”

“ye. we ar not go to be marri yet. becaus everi thing is to 
got readi. and i don’t want to be marri so veri soon, becaus i 
it is nice to be engag. and we shall be marri all our live after.”

“i do believ you could not marri better, kitti. sir jame is a good,
honor man,” said dorothea, warmli.

“he ha gone on with the cottag, dodo. he will tell you about 
when he come. shall you be glad to see him?”

“of cours i shall. how can you ask me?”

“onli i wa afraid you would be get so learn,” said celia,
regard mr. casaubon’s learn as a kind of damp which might in 
time satur a neighbor bodi.




chapter xxix.

i found that no geniu in anoth could pleas me. my 
paradox had entir dri up that sourc of comfort.—goldsmith.


on morn, some week after her arriv at lowick, dorothea—but 
alwai dorothea? wa her point of view the onli possibl on 
regard to thi marriag? i protest against all our interest, all 
effort at understand be given to the young skin that 
bloom in spite of troubl; for these too will get fade, and 
know the older and more eat grief which we ar help to neglect.
in spite of the blink ey and white mole objection to celia,
and the want of muscular curv which wa moral pain to sir jame,
mr. casaubon had an intens conscious within him, and 
spiritu a-hunger like the rest of us. he had done 
except in marri—noth but what societi sanction, 
consid an occas for wreath and bouquet. it had occur to 
that he must not ani longer defer hi intent of matrimoni, and 
had reflect that in take a wife, a man of good posit 
expect and carefulli choos a bloom young ladi—the younger 
better, becaus more educ and submiss—of a rank equal to 
own, of religi principl, virtuou disposit, and 
understand. on such a young ladi he would make handsom settlement,
and he would neglect no arrang for her happi: in return, 
should receiv famili pleasur and leav behind him that copi 
himself which seem so urgent requir of a man—to the sonnet 
the sixteenth centuri. time had alter sinc then, and no 
had insist on mr. casaubon’s leav a copi of himself; moreov, 
had not yet succeed in issu copi of hi mytholog kei; but 
had alwai intend to acquit himself by marriag, and the sens 
he wa fast leav the year behind him, that the world wa 
dimmer and that he felt lone, wa a reason to him for lose no 
time in overtak domest delight befor thei too were left 
by the year.

and when he had seen dorothea he believ that he had found even 
than he demand: she might realli be such a helpmat to him as 
enabl him to dispens with a hire secretari, an aid which mr.
casaubon had never yet emploi and had a suspici dread of. (mr.
casaubon wa nervous consciou that he wa expect to manifest 
power mind.) provid, in it kind, had suppli him with 
wife he need. a wife, a modest young ladi, with the 
appreci, unambiti abil of her sex, is sure to think 
husband’s mind power. whether provid had taken equal care 
miss brook in present her with mr. casaubon wa an idea which 
hardli occur to him. societi never made the preposter demand that 
man should think as much about hi own qualif for make 
charm girl happi as he think of her for make himself happi. 
if a man could choos not onli hi wife but hi wife’s husband! or 
if he were bound to provid charm for hi poster in hi 
person!— when dorothea accept him with effus, that wa 
natur; and mr. casaubon believ that hi happi wa go 
begin.

he had not had much foretast of happi in hi previou life. 
know intens joi without a strong bodili frame, on must have 
enthusiast soul. mr. casaubon had never had a strong bodili frame,
and hi soul wa sensit without be enthusiast: it wa 
languid to thrill out of self-conscious into passion delight; 
went on flutter in the swampi ground where it wa hatch, 
of it wing and never fly. hi experi wa of that pitiabl 
which shrink from piti, and fear most of all that it should be known:
it wa that proud narrow sensit which ha not mass enough 
spare for transform into sympathi, and quiver thread-like 
small current of self-preoccup or at best of an 
scrupulos. and mr. casaubon had mani scrupl: he wa capabl of 
sever self-restraint; he wa resolut in be a man of 
accord to the code; he would be unimpeach by ani 
opinion. in conduct these end had been attain; but the difficulti 
make hi kei to all mytholog unimpeach weigh like lead 
hi mind; and the pamphlet—or “parerga” as he call them—by which 
test hi public and deposit small monument record of hi march,
were far from have been seen in all their signific. he 
the archdeacon of not have read them; he wa in pain doubt as 
what wa realli thought of them by the lead mind of brasenos, 
bitterli convinc that hi old acquaint carp had been the 
of that depreciatori recens which wa kept lock in a small 
of mr. casaubon’s desk, and also in a dark closet of hi verbal memori.
these were heavi impress to struggl against, and brought 
melancholi embitter which is the consequ of all 
claim: even hi religi faith waver with hi waver trust in 
own authorship, and the consol of the christian hope 
immort seem to lean on the immort of the still 
kei to all mytholog. for my part i am veri sorri for him. it is 
uneasi lot at best, to be what we call highli taught and yet not 
enjoi: to be present at thi great spectacl of life and never to 
liber from a small hungri shiver self—never to be 
possess by the glori we behold, never to have our 
raptur transform into the vivid of a thought, the ardor of 
passion, the energi of an action, but alwai to be scholarli 
uninspir, ambiti and timid, scrupul and dim-sight. becom 
dean or even a bishop would make littl differ, i fear, to mr.
casaubon’s uneasi. doubtless some ancient greek ha observ 
behind the big mask and the speak-trumpet, there must alwai be 
poor littl ey peep as usual and our timor lip more or 
under anxiou control.

to thi mental estat map out a quarter of a centuri befor, 
sensibl thu fenc in, mr. casaubon had thought of 
happi with a love young bride; but even befor marriag, as 
have seen, he found himself under a new depress in the 
that the new bliss wa not bliss to him. inclin yearn back 
it old, easier custom. and the deeper he went in domest the 
did the sens of acquit himself and act with 
predomin over ani other satisfact. marriag, like religion 
erudit, nai, like authorship itself, wa fate to becom an 
requir, and edward casaubon wa bent on fulfil 
all requir. even draw dorothea into us in hi studi,
accord to hi own intent befor marriag, wa an effort which 
wa alwai tempt to defer, and but for her plead insist 
might never have begun. but she had succeed in make it a matter 
cours that she should take her place at an earli hour in the 
and have work either of read aloud or copi assign her. the 
had been easier to defin becaus mr. casaubon had adopt an 
intent: there wa to be a new parergon, a small monograph on 
late trace indic concern the egyptian mysteri 
certain assert of warburton’s could be correct. refer 
extens even here, but not altogeth shoreless; and sentenc 
actual to be written in the shape wherein thei would be scan 
brasenos and a less formid poster. these minor 
product were alwai excit to mr. casaubon; digest wa 
difficult by the interfer of citat, or by the rivalri 
dialect phrase ring against each other in hi brain. and 
the first there wa to be a latin dedic about which everyth 
uncertain except that it wa not to be address to carp: it wa 
poison regret to mr. casaubon that he had onc address 
dedic to carp in which he had number that member of the 
kingdom among the _viro nullo ævo perituro_, a mistak which 
infal lai the dedic open to ridicul in the next ag, 
might even be chuckl over by pike and tench in the present.

thu mr. casaubon wa in on of hi busiest epoch, and as i began 
sai a littl while ago, dorothea join him earli in the librari 
he had breakfast alon. celia at thi time wa on a second visit 
lowick, probabl the last befor her marriag, and wa in 
draw-room expect sir jame.

dorothea had learn to read the sign of her husband’s mood, and 
saw that the morn had becom more foggi there dure the last hour.
she wa go silent to her desk when he said, in that distant 
which impli that he wa discharg a disagre duti—

“dorothea, here is a letter for you, which wa enclos in 
address to me.”

it wa a letter of two page, and she immedi look at 
signatur.

“mr. ladislaw! what can he have to sai to me?” she exclaim, in a 
of pleas surpris. “but,” she ad, look at mr. casaubon, “i 
imagin what he ha written to you about.”

“you can, if you pleas, read the letter,” said mr. casaubon, 
point to it with hi pen, and not look at her. “but i mai as 
sai beforehand, that i must declin the propos it contain to pai 
visit here. i trust i mai be excus for desir an interv 
complet freedom from such distract as have been 
inevit, and especi from guest whose desultori vivac 
their presenc a fatigu.”

there had been no clash of temper between dorothea and her 
sinc that littl explos in rome, which had left such strong 
in her mind that it had been easier ever sinc to quell emot than 
incur the consequ of vent it. but thi ill-temper 
that she could desir visit which might be disagre to 
husband, thi gratuit defenc of himself against selfish 
on her part, wa too sharp a sting to be medit on until after 
had been resent. dorothea had thought that she could have 
patient with john milton, but she had never imagin him behav 
thi wai; and for a moment mr. casaubon seem to be 
undiscern and odious unjust. piti, that “new-born babe” which 
by-and-by to rule mani a storm within her, did not “stride the blast”
on thi occas. with her first word, utter in a tone that 
him, she startl mr. casaubon into look at her, and meet 
flash of her ey.

“why do you attribut to me a wish for anyth that would annoi you?
you speak to me as if i were someth you had to contend against. 
at least till i appear to consult my own pleasur apart from your.”

“dorothea, you ar hasti,” answer mr. casaubon, nervous.

decidedli, thi woman wa too young to be on the formid level 
wifehood—unless she had been pale and featureless and taken 
for grant.

“i think it wa you who were first hasti in your fals 
about my feel,” said dorothea, in the same tone. the fire wa 
dissip yet, and she thought it wa ignobl in her husband not 
apolog to her.

“we will, if you pleas, sai no more on thi subject, dorothea. i 
neither leisur nor energi for thi kind of debat.”

here mr. casaubon dip hi pen and made as if he would return to 
write, though hi hand trembl so much that the word seem to 
written in an unknown charact. there ar answer which, in 
awai wrath, onli send it to the other end of the room, and to have 
discuss coolli waiv when you feel that justic is all on your 
side is even more exasper in marriag than in philosophi.

dorothea left ladislaw’s two letter unread on her husband’
write-tabl and went to her own place, the scorn and 
within her reject the read of these letter, just as we hurl 
ani trash toward which we seem to have been suspect of 
cupid. she did not in the least divin the subtl sourc of 
husband’s bad temper about these letter: she onli knew that thei 
caus him to offend her. she began to work at onc, and her hand 
not trembl; on the contrari, in write out the quotat which 
been given to her the dai befor, she felt that she wa form 
letter beautifulli, and it seem to her that she saw the 
of the latin she wa copi, and which she wa begin 
understand, more clearli than usual. in her indign there wa 
sens of superior, but it went out for the present in firm 
stroke, and did not compress itself into an inward articul 
pronounc the onc “affabl archangel” a poor creatur.

there had been thi appar quiet for half an hour, and dorothea 
not look awai from her own tabl, when she heard the loud bang of 
book on the floor, and turn quickli saw mr. casaubon on the 
step cling forward as if he were in some bodili distress. 
start up and bound toward him in an instant: he wa evid 
great strait for breath. jump on a stool she got close to hi 
and said with her whole soul melt into tender alarm—

“can you lean on me, dear?”

he wa still for two or three minut, which seem endless to her,
unabl to speak or move, gasp for breath. when at last he 
the three step and fell backward in the larg chair which dorothea 
drawn close to the foot of the ladder, he no longer gasp but 
helpless and about to faint. dorothea rang the bell violent, 
present mr. casaubon wa help to the couch: he did not faint, 
wa gradual reviv, when sir jame chettam came in, have been 
in the hall with the new that mr. casaubon had “had a fit in 
librari.”

“good god! thi is just what might have been expect,” wa 
immedi thought. if hi prophet soul had been urg 
particular, it seem to him that “fit” would have been 
definit express alight upon. he ask hi inform, the butler,
whether the doctor had been sent for. the butler never knew hi 
to want the doctor befor; but would it not be right to send for 
physician?

when sir jame enter the librari, howev, mr. casaubon could 
some sign of hi usual polit, and dorothea, who in the 
from her first terror had been kneel and sob by hi side 
rose and herself propos that some on should ride off for a 
man.

“i recommend you to send for lydgat,” said sir jame. “my mother 
call him in, and she ha found him uncommonli clever. she ha had 
poor opinion of the physician sinc my father’s death.”

dorothea appeal to her husband, and he made a silent sign 
approv. so mr. lydgat wa sent for and he came wonderfulli soon, 
the messeng, who wa sir jame chettam’s man and knew mr. lydgat,
met him lead hi hors along the lowick road and give hi arm 
miss vinci.

celia, in the draw-room, had known noth of the troubl till 
jame told her of it. after dorothea’s account, he no longer 
the ill a fit, but still someth “of that natur.”

“poor dear dodo—how dread!” said celia, feel as much griev 
her own perfect happi would allow. her littl hand were clasp,
and enclos by sir jame’s as a bud is enfold by a liber calyx.
“it is veri shock that mr. casaubon should be ill; but i never 
like him. and i think he is not half fond enough of dorothea; and 
ought to be, for i am sure no on els would have had him—do you 
thei would?”

“i alwai thought it a horribl sacrific of your sister,” said 
jame.

“ye. but poor dodo never did do what other peopl do, and i think 
never will.”

“she is a nobl creatur,” said the loyal-heart sir jame. he 
just had a fresh impress of thi kind, as he had seen 
stretch her tender arm under her husband’s neck and look at 
with unspeak sorrow. he did not know how much penit there 
in the sorrow.

“ye,” said celia, think it wa veri well for sir jame to sai so,
but _he_ would not have been comfort with dodo. “shall i go to her?
could i help her, do you think?”

“i think it would be well for you just to go and see her befor 
come,” said sir jame, magnanim. “onli don’t stai long.”

while celia wa gone he walk up and down rememb what he 
origin felt about dorothea’s engag, and feel a reviv 
hi disgust at mr. brook’s indiffer. if cadwallad—if everi 
els had regard the affair as he, sir jame, had done, the 
might have been hinder. it wa wick to let a young girl 
decid her fate in that wai, without ani effort to save her. sir 
had long ceas to have ani regret on hi own account: hi heart 
satisfi with hi engag to celia. but he had a chivalr 
(wa not the disinterest servic of woman among the ideal glori 
old chivalri?): hi disregard love had not turn to bitter; 
death had made sweet odor—float memori that clung with 
consecr effect to dorothea. he could remain her brotherli friend,
interpret her action with gener trust.




chapter xxx.

qui veut délasser hor de propo, lass.—pascal.


mr. casaubon had no second attack of equal sever with the first, 
in a few dai began to recov hi usual condit. but lydgat 
to think the case worth a great deal of attent. he not onli us 
stethoscop (which had not becom a matter of cours in practic 
that time), but sat quietli by hi patient and watch him. to mr.
casaubon’s question about himself, he repli that the sourc of 
ill wa the common error of intellectu men—a too eager 
monoton applic: the remedi wa, to be satisfi with 
work, and to seek varieti of relax. mr. brook, who sat by on 
occas, suggest that mr. casaubon should go fish, as 
did, and have a turn-room, make toi, tabl-leg, and that kind 
thing.

“in short, you recommend me to anticip the arriv of my 
childhood,” said poor mr. casaubon, with some bitter. “
thing,” he ad, look at lydgat, “would be to me such 
as tow-pick is to prison in a hous of correct.”

“i confess,” said lydgat, smile, “amus is rather 
unsatisfactori prescript. it is someth like tell peopl 
keep up their spirit. perhap i had better sai, that you must 
to be mildli bore rather than to go on work.”

“ye, ye,” said mr. brook. “get dorothea to plai backgammon with 
in the even. and shuttlecock, now—i don’t know a finer game 
shuttlecock for the daytim. i rememb it all the fashion. to be sure,
your ey might not stand that, casaubon. but you must unbend, 
know. why, you might take to some light studi: concholog, now: 
alwai think that must be a light studi. or get dorothea to read 
light thing, smollett—‘roderick random,’ ‘humphrei clinker:’ thei 
a littl broad, but she mai read anyth now she’s marri, you know.
i rememb thei made me laugh uncommonli—there’s a droll bit about 
postilion’s breech. we have no such humor now. i have gone 
all these thing, but thei might be rather new to you.”

“as new as eat thistl,” would have been an answer to repres mr.
casaubon’s feel. but he onli bow resignedli, with due respect 
hi wife’s uncl, and observ that doubtless the work he 
had “serv as a resourc to a certain order of mind.”

“you see,” said the abl magistr to lydgat, when thei were 
the door, “casaubon ha been a littl narrow: it leav him rather at 
loss when you forbid him hi particular work, which i believ 
someth veri deep inde—in the line of research, you know. i 
never give wai to that; i wa alwai versatil. but a clergyman is 
a littl tight. if thei would make him a bishop, now!—he did a 
good pamphlet for peel. he would have more movement then, more show; 
might get a littl flesh. but i recommend you to talk to mr. casaubon.
she is clever enough for anyth, is my niec. tell her, her 
want liveli, divers: put her on amus tactic.”

without mr. brook’s advic, lydgat had determin on speak 
dorothea. she had not been present while her uncl wa throw out 
pleasant suggest as to the mode in which life at lowick might 
enliven, but she wa usual by her husband’s side, and 
unaffect sign of intens anxieti in her face and voic 
whatev touch hi mind or health, made a drama which lydgat 
inclin to watch. he said to himself that he wa onli do right 
tell her the truth about her husband’s probabl futur, but 
certainli thought also that it would be interest to 
confidenti with her. a medic man like to make 
observ, and sometim in the pursuit of such studi is 
easili tempt into moment propheci which life and death easili 
at nought. lydgat had often been satir on thi 
predict, and he meant now to be guard.

he ask for mr. casaubon, but be told that she wa out walk, 
wa go awai, when dorothea and celia appear, both glow 
their struggl with the march wind. when lydgat beg to speak 
her alon, dorothea open the librari door which happen to be 
nearest, think of noth at the moment but what he might have 
sai about mr. casaubon. it wa the first time she had enter thi 
sinc her husband had been taken ill, and the servant had chosen not 
open the shutter. but there wa light enough to read by from 
narrow upper pane of the window.

“you will not mind thi sombr light,” said dorothea, stand in 
middl of the room. “sinc you forbad book, the librari ha been 
of the question. but mr. casaubon will soon be here again, i hope. 
he not make progress?”

“ye, much more rapid progress than i at first expect. inde, he 
alreadi nearli in hi usual state of health.”

“you do not fear that the ill will return?” said dorothea, 
quick ear had detect some signific in lydgat’s tone.

“such case ar peculiarli difficult to pronounc upon,” said lydgat.
“the onli point on which i can be confid is that it will 
desir to be veri watch on mr. casaubon’s account, lest he 
in ani wai strain hi nervou power.”

“i beseech you to speak quit plainli,” said dorothea, in an 
tone. “i cannot bear to think that there might be someth which i 
not know, and which, if i had known it, would have made me 
differ.” the word came out like a cry: it wa evid that 
were the voic of some mental experi which lai not veri far off.

“sit down,” she ad, place herself on the nearest chair, 
throw off her bonnet and glove, with an instinct discard 
formal where a great question of destini wa concern.

“what you sai now justifi my own view,” said lydgat. “i think it 
on’s function as a medic man to hinder regret of that sort as 
as possibl. but i beg you to observ that mr. casaubon’s case 
precis of the kind in which the issu is most difficult to 
upon. he mai possibl live for fifteen year or more, without 
wors health than he ha had hitherto.”

dorothea had turn veri pale, and when lydgat paus she said in 
low voic, “you mean if we ar veri care.”

“ye—care against mental agit of all kind, and 
excess applic.”

“he would be miser, if he had to give up hi work,” said dorothea,
with a quick previs of that wretched.

“i am awar of that. the onli cours is to try by all mean, direct 
indirect, to moder and vari hi occup. with a 
concurr of circumst, there is, as i said, no immedi 
from that affect of the heart, which i believ to have been 
caus of hi late attack. on the other hand, it is possibl that 
diseas mai develop itself more rapidli: it is on of those case 
which death is sometim sudden. noth should be neglect 
might be affect by such an issu.”

there wa silenc for a few moment, while dorothea sat as if she 
been turn to marbl, though the life within her wa so intens 
her mind had never befor swept in brief time over an equal rang 
scene and motiv.

“help me, prai,” she said, at last, in the same low voic as befor.
“tell me what i can do.”

“what do you think of foreign travel? you have been late in rome, 
think.”

the memori which made thi resourc utterli hopeless were a 
current that shook dorothea out of her pallid immobl.

“oh, that would not do—that would be wors than anyth,” she 
with a more childlik despond, while the tear roll down.
“noth will be of ani us that he doe not enjoi.”

“i wish that i could have spare you thi pain,” said lydgat, 
touch, yet wonder about her marriag. women just like dorothea 
not enter into hi tradit.

“it wa right of you to tell me. i thank you for tell me the truth.”

“i wish you to understand that i shall not sai anyth to 
mr. casaubon himself. i think it desir for him to know noth 
than that he must not overwork himself, and must observ certain rule.
anxieti of ani kind would be precis the most unfavor 
for him.”

lydgat rose, and dorothea mechan rose at the same time,
unclasp her cloak and throw it off as if it stifl her. he 
bow and quit her, when an impuls which if she had been 
would have turn into a prayer, made her sai with a sob in her voic—

“oh, you ar a wise man, ar you not? you know all about life 
death. advis me. think what i can do. he ha been labor all 
life and look forward. he mind about noth els.— and i 
about noth els—”

for year after lydgat rememb the impress produc in him 
thi involuntari appeal—thi cry from soul to soul, without 
conscious than their move with kindr natur in the 
embroil medium, the same troublou fitfulli illumin life. 
what could he sai now except that he should see mr. casaubon 
to-morrow?

when he wa gone, dorothea’s tear gush forth, and reliev 
stifl oppress. then she dri her ey, remind that 
distress must not be betrai to her husband; and look round the 
think that she must order the servant to attend to it as usual,
sinc mr. casaubon might now at ani moment wish to enter. on 
write-tabl there were letter which had lain untouch sinc 
morn when he wa taken ill, and among them, as dorothea 
rememb, there were young ladislaw’s letter, the on address 
her still unopen. the associ of these letter had been made 
more pain by that sudden attack of ill which she felt that 
agit caus by her anger might have help to bring on: it 
be time enough to read them when thei were again thrust upon her, 
she had had no inclin to fetch them from the librari. but now 
occur to her that thei should be put out of her husband’s sight:
whatev might have been the sourc of hi annoy about them, 
must, if possibl, not be annoi again; and she ran her ey 
over the letter address to him to assur herself whether or not 
would be necessari to write in order to hinder the offens visit.

will wrote from rome, and began by sai that hi oblig to mr.
casaubon were too deep for all thank not to seem impertin. it 
plain that if he were not grate, he must be the poorest-
rascal who had ever found a gener friend. to expand in wordi 
would be like sai, “i am honest.” but will had come to perceiv 
hi defect—defect which mr. casaubon had himself often 
to—need for their correct that more strenuou posit which 
rel’s generos had hitherto prevent from be inevit. 
trust that he should make the best return, if return were possibl,
by show the effect of the educ for which he 
indebt, and by ceas in futur to need ani divers 
himself of fund on which other might have a better claim. he 
come to england, to try hi fortun, as mani other young men 
oblig to do whose onli capit wa in their brain. hi 
naumann had desir him to take charg of the “disput”—the 
paint for mr. casaubon, with whose permiss, and mr. casaubon’s,
will would convei it to lowick in person. a letter address to 
post restant in pari within the fortnight would hinder him, 
necessari, from arriv at an inconveni moment. he enclos 
letter to mr. casaubon in which he continu a discuss about art,
begun with her in rome.

open her own letter dorothea saw that it wa a live 
of hi remonstr with her fanat sympathi and her want of 
neutral delight in thing as thei were—an outpour of hi 
vivac which it wa imposs to read just now. she had 
to consid what wa to be done about the other letter: there wa 
time perhap to prevent will from come to lowick. dorothea end 
give the letter to her uncl, who wa still in the hous, and 
him to let will know that mr. casaubon had been ill, and that 
health would not allow the recept of ani visitor.

no on more readi than mr. brook to write a letter: hi 
difficulti wa to write a short on, and hi idea in thi 
expand over the three larg page and the inward fold. he 
simpli said to dorothea—

“to be sure, i will write, my dear. he’s a veri clever 
fellow—thi young ladislaw—i dare sai will be a rise young man. it’
a good letter—mark hi sens of thing, you know. howev, i will 
him about casaubon.”

but the end of mr. brook’s pen wa a think organ, 
sentenc, especi of a benevol kind, befor the rest of hi 
could well overtak them. it express regret and propos remedi,
which, when mr. brook read them, seem 
word—surprisingli the right thing, and determin a sequel which 
had never befor thought of. in thi case, hi pen found it such a 
young ladislaw should not have come into the neighborhood just at 
time, in order that mr. brook might make hi acquaint more fulli,
and that thei might go over the long-neglect italian 
togeth—it also felt such an interest in a young man who wa 
in life with a stock of idea—that by the end of the second page it 
persuad mr. brook to invit young ladislaw, sinc he could not 
receiv at lowick, to come to tipton grang. why not? thei could 
a great mani thing to do togeth, and thi wa a period of 
growth—the polit horizon wa expand, and—in short, mr. brook’
pen went off into a littl speech which it had late report for 
imperfectli edit organ the “middlemarch pioneer.” while mr. 
wa seal thi letter, he felt elat with an influx of 
project:—a young man capabl of put idea into form, the “pioneer”
purchas to clear the pathwai for a new candid, 
util—who knew what might come of it all? sinc celia wa go 
marri immedi, it would be veri pleasant to have a young fellow 
tabl with him, at least for a time.

but he went awai without tell dorothea what he had put into 
letter, for she wa engag with her husband, and—in fact, these 
were of no import to her.




chapter xxxi.

how will you know the pitch of that great 
too larg for you to stir? let but a 
plai ’neath the fine-mix metal: listen 
till the right note flow forth, a silveri rill:
then shall the huge bell trembl—then the 
with myriad wave concurr shall 
in low soft unison.


lydgat that even spoke to miss vinci of mr. casaubon, and 
some emphasi on the strong feel she appear to have for 
formal studiou man thirti year older than herself.

“of cours she is devot to her husband,” said rosamond, impli 
notion of necessari sequenc which the scientif man regard as 
prettiest possibl for a woman; but she wa think at the same 
that it wa not so veri melancholi to be mistress of lowick manor 
a husband like to die soon. “do you think her veri handsom?”

“she certainli is handsom, but i have not thought about it,” 
lydgat.

“i suppos it would be unprofession,” said rosamond, dimpl. “
how your practic is spread! you were call in befor to 
chettam, i think; and now, the casaubon.”

“ye,” said lydgat, in a tone of compulsori admiss. “but i don’
realli like attend such peopl so well as the poor. the case 
more monoton, and on ha to go through more fuss and listen 
deferenti to nonsens.”

“not more than in middlemarch,” said rosamond. “and at least you 
through wide corridor and have the scent of rose-leav everywher.”

“that is true, mademoisel de montmor,” said lydgat, just 
hi head to the tabl and lift with hi fourth finger her 
handkerchief which lai at the mouth of her reticul, as if to enjoi 
scent, while he look at her with a smile.

but thi agreeabl holidai freedom with which lydgat hover about 
flower of middlemarch, could not continu indefinit. it wa not 
possibl to find social isol in that town than elsewher, and 
peopl persist flirt could by no mean escap from “the 
entangl, weight, blow, clash, motion, by which 
sever go on.” whatev miss vinci did must be remark, and she 
perhap the more conspicu to admir and critic becaus just 
mr. vinci, after some struggl, had gone with fred to stai a 
while at stone court, there be no other wai of at onc 
old featherston and keep watch against mari garth, who appear 
less toler daughter-in-law in proport as fred’s 
disappear.

aunt bulstrod, for exampl, came a littl often into lowick gate 
see rosamond, now she wa alon. for mr. bulstrod had a true 
feel for her brother; alwai think that he might have 
better, but wish well to the children. now mr. bulstrod had 
long-stand intimaci with mr. plymdal. thei had nearli the 
prefer in silk, pattern for undercloth, china-ware, 
clergymen; thei confid their littl troubl of health and 
manag to each other, and variou littl point of superior 
mr. bulstrod’s side, name, more decid serious, 
admir for mind, and a hous outsid the town, sometim serv 
give color to their convers without divid them—well-
women both, know veri littl of their own motiv.

mr. bulstrod, pai a morn visit to mr. plymdal, happen 
sai that she could not stai longer, becaus she wa go to see 
rosamond.

“why do you sai ‘poor rosamond’?” said mr. plymdal, a round-
sharp littl woman, like a tame falcon.

“she is so pretti, and ha been brought up in such thoughtless. 
mother, you know, had alwai that leviti about her, which make 
anxiou for the children.”

“well, harriet, if i am to speak my mind,” said mr. plymdal, 
emphasi, “i must sai, anybodi would suppos you and mr. 
would be delight with what ha happen, for you have done 
to put mr. lydgat forward.”

“selina, what do you mean?” said mr. bulstrod, in genuin surpris.

“not but what i am truli thank for ned’s sake,” said mr. plymdal.
“he could certainli better afford to keep such a wife than some 
can; but i should wish him to look elsewher. still a mother 
anxieti, and some young men would take to a bad life in consequ.
besid, if i wa oblig to speak, i should sai i wa not fond 
stranger come into a town.”

“i don’t know, selina,” said mr. bulstrod, with a littl emphasi 
her turn. “mr. bulstrod wa a stranger here at on time. abraham 
mose were stranger in the land, and we ar told to 
stranger. and especi,” she ad, after a slight paus, “when 
ar unexception.”

“i wa not speak in a religi sens, harriet. i spoke as 
mother.”

“selina, i am sure you have never heard me sai anyth against a 
of mine marri your son.”

“oh, it is pride in miss vinci—i am sure it is noth els,” said mr.
plymdal, who had never befor given all her confid to “harriet” 
thi subject. “no young man in middlemarch wa good enough for her: 
have heard her mother sai as much. that is not a christian spirit, 
think. but now, from all i hear, she ha found a man as proud 
herself.”

“you don’t mean that there is anyth between rosamond and mr.
lydgat?” said mr. bulstrod, rather mortifi at find out her 
ignor.

“is it possibl you don’t know, harriet?”

“oh, i go about so littl; and i am not fond of gossip; i realli 
hear ani. you see so mani peopl that i don’t see. your circl 
rather differ from our.”

“well, but your own niec and mr. bulstrod’s great favorit—and 
too, i am sure, harriet! i thought, at on time, you meant him 
kate, when she is a littl older.”

“i don’t believ there can be anyth seriou at present,” said mr.
bulstrod. “my brother would certainli have told me.”

“well, peopl have differ wai, but i understand that nobodi can 
miss vinci and mr. lydgat togeth without take them to be engag.
howev, it is not my busi. shall i put up the pattern of mitten?”

after thi mr. bulstrod drove to her niec with a mind 
weight. she wa herself handsom dress, but she notic with 
littl more regret than usual that rosamond, who wa just come in 
met her in walk-dress, wa almost as expens equip. mr.
bulstrod wa a feminin smaller edit of her brother, and had 
of her husband’s low-tone pallor. she had a good honest glanc 
us no circumlocut.

“you ar alon, i see, my dear,” she said, as thei enter 
draw-room togeth, look round grave. rosamond felt sure 
her aunt had someth particular to sai, and thei sat down near 
other. nevertheless, the quill insid rosamond’s bonnet wa 
charm that it wa imposs not to desir the same kind of 
for kate, and mr. bulstrod’s ey, which were rather fine, 
round that ampl quill circuit, while she spoke.

“i have just heard someth about you that ha surpris me veri much,
rosamond.”

“what is that, aunt?” rosamond’s ey also were roam over her aunt’
larg embroid collar.

“i can hardli believ it—that you should be engag without my 
it—without your father’s tell me.” here mr. bulstrod’s 
final rest on rosamond’s, who blush deepli, and said—

“i am not engag, aunt.”

“how is it that everi on sai so, then—that it is the town’s talk?”

“the town’s talk is of veri littl consequ, i think,” 
rosamond, inwardli gratifi.

“oh, my dear, be more thought; don’t despis your neighbor so.
rememb you ar turn twenti-two now, and you will have no fortun:
your father, i am sure, will not be abl to spare you anyth. mr.
lydgat is veri intellectu and clever; i know there is an 
in that. i like talk to such men myself; and your uncl find 
veri us. but the profess is a poor on here. to be sure, 
life is not everyth; but it is seldom a medic man ha 
religi view—there is too much pride of intellect. and you ar 
fit to marri a poor man.

“mr. lydgat is not a poor man, aunt. he ha veri high connect.”

“he told me himself he wa poor.”

“that is becaus he is us to peopl who have a high style of live.”

“my dear rosamond, _you_ must not think of live in high style.”

rosamond look down and plai with her reticul. she wa not a 
young ladi and had no sharp answer, but she meant to live as 
pleas.

“then it is realli true?” said mr. bulstrod, look veri 
at her niec. “you ar think of mr. lydgat—there is 
understand between you, though your father doesn’t know. be open, 
dear rosamond: mr. lydgat ha realli made you an offer?”

poor rosamond’s feel were veri unpleas. she had been quit 
as to lydgat’s feel and intent, but now when her aunt put 
question she did not like be unabl to sai ye. her pride wa hurt,
but her habitu control of manner help her.

“prai excus me, aunt. i would rather not speak on the subject.”

“you would not give your heart to a man without a decid prospect, 
trust, my dear. and think of the two excel offer i know of 
you have refus!—and on still within your reach, if you will 
throw it awai. i knew a veri great beauti who marri badli at last, 
do so. mr. ned plymdal is a nice young man—some might 
good-look; and an onli son; and a larg busi of that kind 
better than a profess. not that marri is everyth. i would 
you seek first the kingdom of god. but a girl should keep her 
within her own power.”

“i should never give it to mr. ned plymdal, if it were. i have 
refus him. if i love, i should love at onc and without chang,”
said rosamond, with a great sens of be a romant heroin, 
plai the part prettili.

“i see how it is, my dear,” said mr. bulstrod, in a melancholi voic,
rise to go. “you have allow your affect to be engag 
return.”

“no, inde, aunt,” said rosamond, with emphasi.

“then you ar quit confid that mr. lydgat ha a seriou 
to you?”

rosamond’s cheek by thi time were persist burn, and she 
much mortif. she chose to be silent, and her aunt went awai 
the more convinc.

mr. bulstrod in thing worldli and indiffer wa dispos to do 
hi wife bade him, and she now, without tell her reason, 
him on the next opportun to find out in convers with mr.
lydgat whether he had ani intent of marri soon. the result wa 
decid neg. mr. bulstrod, on be cross-question, show 
lydgat had spoken as no man would who had ani attach that 
issu in matrimoni. mr. bulstrod now felt that she had a seriou 
befor her, and she soon manag to arrang a _tête-à-tête_ 
lydgat, in which she pass from inquiri about fred vinci’s health,
and express of her sincer anxieti for her brother’s larg famili,
to gener remark on the danger which lai befor young peopl 
regard to their settlement in life. young men were often wild 
disappoint, make littl return for the monei spent on them, and 
girl wa expos to mani circumst which might interfer with 
prospect.

“especi when she ha great attract, and her parent see 
compani,” said mr. bulstrod. “gentlemen pai her attent, 
engross her all to themselv, for the mere pleasur of the moment, 
that drive off other. i think it is a heavi respons, mr.
lydgat, to interfer with the prospect of ani girl.” here mr.
bulstrod fix her ey on him, with an unmistak purpos 
warn, if not of rebuk.

“clearli,” said lydgat, look at her—perhap even stare a 
in return. “on the other hand, a man must be a great coxcomb to 
about with a notion that he must not pai attent to a young ladi 
she should fall in love with him, or lest other should think 
must.”

“oh, mr. lydgat, you know well what your advantag ar. you know 
our young men here cannot cope with you. where you frequent a hous 
mai milit veri much against a girl’s make a desir 
in life, and prevent her from accept offer even if thei ar made.”

lydgat wa less flatter by hi advantag over the 
orlando than he wa annoi by the percept of mr. bulstrod’
mean. she felt that she had spoken as impress as it 
necessari to do, and that in us the superior word “milit” she 
thrown a nobl draperi over a mass of particular which were 
evid enough.

lydgat wa fume a littl, push hi hair back with on hand, 
curious in hi waistcoat-pocket with the other, and then stoop 
beckon the tini black spaniel, which had the insight to declin 
hollow caress. it would not have been decent to go awai, becaus 
had been dine with other guest, and had just taken tea. but mr.
bulstrod, have no doubt that she had been understood, turn 
convers.

solomon’s proverb, i think, have omit to sai, that as the 
palat findeth grit, so an uneasi conscious heareth innuendo. 
next dai mr. farebroth, part from lydgat in the street, 
that thei should meet at vinci’s in the even. lydgat 
curtli, no—he had work to do—he must give up go out in the even.

“what! you ar go to get lash to the mast, eh, and ar 
your ear?” said the vicar. “well, if you don’t mean to be won by 
siren, you ar right to take precaut in time.”

a few dai befor, lydgat would have taken no notic of these word 
anyth more than the vicar’s usual wai of put thing. thei 
now to convei an innuendo which confirm the impress that he 
been make a fool of himself and behav so as to be misunderstood:
not, he believ, by rosamond herself; she, he felt sure, 
everyth as lightli as he intend it. she had an exquisit tact 
insight in relat to all point of manner; but the peopl she 
among were blunder and busybodi. howev, the mistak should go 
farther. he resolv—and kept hi resolut—that he would not go 
mr. vinci’s except on busi.

rosamond becam veri unhappi. the uneasi first stir by 
aunt’s question grew and grew till at the end of ten dai that she 
not seen lydgat, it grew into terror at the blank that might 
come—into forebod of that readi, fatal spong which so cheapli 
out the hope of mortal. the world would have a new dreari 
her, as a wilder that a magician’s spell had turn for a 
while into a garden. she felt that she wa begin to know the 
of disappoint love, and that no other man could be the occas 
such delight aerial build as she had been enjoi for the 
six month. poor rosamond lost her appetit and felt as forlorn 
ariadn—as a charm stage ariadn left behind with all her box 
of costum and no hope of a coach.

there ar mani wonder mixtur in the world which ar all 
call love, and claim the privileg of a sublim rage which is 
apolog for everyth (in literatur and the drama). happili 
did not think of commit ani desper act: she plait her 
hair as beautifulli as usual, and kept herself proudli calm. her 
cheer supposit wa that her aunt bulstrod had interf in 
wai to hinder lydgat’s visit: everyth wa better than 
spontan indiffer in him. ani on who imagin ten dai 
short a time—not for fall into lean, light, or 
measur effect of passion, but—for the whole spiritu circuit 
alarm conjectur and disappoint, is ignor of what can go on 
the eleg leisur of a young ladi’s mind.

on the eleventh dai, howev, lydgat when leav stone court 
request by mr. vinci to let her husband know that there wa a 
chang in mr. featherston’s health, and that she wish him to come 
stone court on that dai. now lydgat might have call at 
warehous, or might have written a messag on a leaf of hi pocket-
and left it at the door. yet these simpl devic appar did 
occur to him, from which we mai conclud that he had no 
object to call at the hous at an hour when mr. vinci wa not 
home, and leav the messag with miss vinci. a man mai, from 
motiv, declin to give hi compani, but perhap not even a sage 
be gratifi that nobodi miss him. it would be a grace, easi 
of piec on the new habit to the old, to have a few play 
with rosamond about hi resist to dissip, and hi firm 
to take long fast even from sweet sound. it must be confess, also,
that momentari specul as to all the possibl ground for mr.
bulstrod’s hint had manag to get woven like slight cling 
into the more substanti web of hi thought.

miss vinci wa alon, and blush so deepli when lydgat came in 
he felt a correspond embarrass, and instead of ani play,
he began at onc to speak of hi reason for call, and to beg her,
almost formal, to deliv the messag to her father. rosamond, who 
the first moment felt as if her happi were return, wa 
hurt by lydgat’s manner; her blush had depart, and she 
coldli, without ad an unnecessari word, some trivial chain-
which she had in her hand enabl her to avoid look at 
higher than hi chin. in all failur, the begin is certainli 
half of the whole. after sit two long moment while he move 
whip and could sai noth, lydgat rose to go, and rosamond, 
nervou by her struggl between mortif and the wish not 
betrai it, drop her chain as if startl, and rose too,
mechan. lydgat instantan stoop to pick up the chain.
when he rose he wa veri near to a love littl face set on a 
long neck which he had been us to see turn about under the 
perfect manag of self-content grace. but as he rais hi 
now he saw a certain helpless quiver which touch him quit newli,
and made him look at rosamond with a question flash. at thi 
she wa as natur as she had ever been when she wa five year old:
she felt that her tear had risen, and it wa no us to try to 
anyth els than let them stai like water on a blue flower or 
them fall over her cheek, even as thei would.

that moment of natur wa the crystal feather-touch: 
shook flirtat into love. rememb that the ambiti man who 
look at those forget-me-not under the water wa veri warm-
and rash. he did not know where the chain went; an idea had 
through the recess within him which had a miracul effect 
rais the power of passion love ly buri there in no 
sepulchr, but under the lightest, easili pierc mould. hi word 
quit abrupt and awkward; but the tone made them sound like an ardent,
appeal avow.

“what is the matter? you ar distress. tell me, prai.”

rosamond had never been spoken to in such tone befor. i am not 
that she knew what the word were: but she look at lydgat and 
tear fell over her cheek. there could have been no more 
answer than that silenc, and lydgat, forget everyth els,
complet master by the outrush of tender at the sudden 
that thi sweet young creatur depend on him for her joi, 
put hi arm round her, fold her gentli and protectingli—he wa 
to be gentl with the weak and suffer—and kiss each of the 
larg tear. thi wa a strang wai of arriv at an understand,
but it wa a short wai. rosamond wa not angri, but she move 
a littl in timid happi, and lydgat could now sit near her 
speak less incomplet. rosamond had to make her littl confess,
and he pour out word of gratitud and tender with 
lavish. in half an hour he left the hous an engag man, 
soul wa not hi own, but the woman’s to whom he had bound himself.

he came again in the even to speak with mr. vinci, who, 
return from stone court, wa feel sure that it would not be 
befor he heard of mr. featherston’s demis. the felicit 
“demis,” which had season occur to him, had rais hi 
even abov their usual even pitch. the right word is alwai a power,
and commun it definit to our action. consid as 
demis, old featherston’s death assum a mere legal aspect, so 
mr. vinci could tap hi snuff-box over it and be jovial, without 
an intermitt affect of solemn; and mr. vinci hate 
solemn and affect. who wa ever aw struck about a testat, 
sang a hymn on the titl to real properti? mr. vinci wa inclin 
take a jovial view of all thing that even: he even observ 
lydgat that fred had got the famili constitut after all, and 
soon be as fine a fellow as ever again; and when hi approb 
rosamond’s engag wa ask for, he gave it with 
facil, pass at onc to gener remark on the desir 
matrimoni for young men and maiden, and appar deduc from 
whole the appropri of a littl more punch.




chapter xxxii.

thei’ll take suggest as a cat lap milk.
—shakespear: _tempest_.


the triumphant confid of the mayor found on mr. featherston’
insist demand that fred and hi mother should not leav him, wa 
feebl emot compar with all that wa agit the breast of 
old man’s blood-relat, who natur manifest more their sens 
the famili tie and were more visibl numer now that he had 
bedridden. natur: for when “poor peter” had occupi hi arm-
in the wainscot parlor, no assidu beetl for whom the 
prepar boil water could have been less welcom on a hearth 
thei had reason for prefer, than those person whose 
blood wa ill-nourish, not from penuri on their part, but 
poverti. brother solomon and sister jane were rich, and the 
candor and total abstin from fals polit with which thei 
alwai receiv seem to them no argument that their brother in 
solemn act of make hi will would overlook the superior claim 
wealth. themselv at least he had never been unnatur enough 
banish from hi hous, and it seem hardli eccentr that he 
have kept awai brother jonah, sister martha, and the rest, who had 
shadow of such claim. thei knew peter’s maxim, that monei wa a 
egg, and should be laid in a warm nest.

but brother jonah, sister martha, and all the needi exil, held 
differ point of view. probabl ar as variou as the face 
be seen at will in fretwork or paper-hang: everi form is there,
from jupit to judi, if you onli look with creativ inclin. 
the poorer and least favor it seem like that sinc peter had 
noth for them in hi life, he would rememb them at the last. 
argu that men like to make a surpris of their will, while 
said that nobodi need be surpris if he left the best part of 
monei to those who least expect it. also it wa not to be thought 
that an own brother “ly there” with dropsi in hi leg must come 
feel that blood wa thicker than water, and if he didn’t alter 
will, he might have monei by him. at ani rate some blood-
should be on the premis and on the watch against those who 
hardli relat at all. such thing had been known as forg will 
disput will, which seem to have the golden-hazi advantag 
somehow enabl non-legate to live out of them. again, those 
were no blood-relat might be caught make awai with thing—
poor peter “ly there” helpless! somebodi should be on the watch. 
in thi conclus thei were at on with solomon and jane; also, 
nephew, niec, and cousin, argu with still greater subtilti as 
what might be done by a man abl to “will awai” hi properti and 
himself larg treat of odditi, felt in a handsom sort of wai 
there wa a famili interest to be attend to, and thought of 
court as a place which it would be noth but right for them to visit.
sister martha, otherwis mr. cranch, live with some wheezi 
the chalki flat, could not undertak the journei; but her son, 
be poor peter’s own nephew, could repres her advantag, 
watch lest hi uncl jonah should make an unfair us of the 
thing which seem like to happen. in fact there wa a gener 
run in the featherston blood that everybodi must watch 
els, and that it would be well for everybodi els to reflect that 
almighti wa watch him.

thu stone court continu saw on or other blood-relat 
or depart, and mari garth had the unpleas task of carri 
messag to mr. featherston, who would see none of them, and sent 
down with the still more unpleas task of tell them so. as 
of the household she felt bound to ask them in good provinci 
to stai and eat; but she chose to consult mr. vinci on the point 
extra down-stair consumpt now that mr. featherston wa laid up.

“oh, my dear, you must do thing handsom where there’s last 
and a properti. god know, i don’t grudg them everi ham in 
hous—onli, save the best for the funer. have some stuf 
alwai, and a fine chees in cut. you must expect to keep open hous 
these last ill,” said liber mr. vinci, onc more of 
note and bright plumag.

but some of the visitor alight and did not depart after the 
treat to veal and ham. brother jonah, for exampl (there ar 
unpleas peopl in most famili; perhap even in the 
aristocraci there ar brobdingnag specimen, gigant in debt 
bloat at greater expens)—brother jonah, i sai, have come down 
the world, wa mainli support by a call which he wa modest 
not to boast of, though it wa much better than swindl either 
exchang or turf, but which did not requir hi presenc at brass 
long as he had a good corner to sit in and a suppli of food. he 
the kitchen-corner, partli becaus he like it best, and partli 
he did not want to sit with solomon, concern whom he had a 
brotherli opinion. seat in a famou arm-chair and in hi best suit,
constantli within sight of good cheer, he had a 
conscious of be on the premis, mingl with 
suggest of sundai and the bar at the green man; and he 
mari garth that he should not go out of reach of hi brother 
while that poor fellow wa abov ground. the troublesom on in 
famili ar usual either the wit or the idiot. jonah wa the 
among the featherston, and joke with the maid-servant when 
came about the hearth, but seem to consid miss garth a 
charact, and follow her with cold ey.

mari would have born thi on pair of ey with compar eas, 
unfortun there wa young cranch, who, have come all the wai 
the chalki flat to repres hi mother and watch hi uncl jonah,
also felt it hi duti to stai and to sit chiefli in the kitchen to 
hi uncl compani. young cranch wa not exactli the balanc 
between the wit and the idiot,—verg slightli toward the 
type, and squint so as to leav everyth in doubt about 
sentiment except that thei were not of a forcibl charact. when 
garth enter the kitchen and mr. jonah featherston began to 
her with hi cold detect ey, young cranch turn hi head in 
same direct seem to insist on it that she should remark how he 
squint, as if he did it with design, like the gypsi when 
read the new testament to them. thi wa rather too much for poor mari;
sometim it made her biliou, sometim it upset her graviti. on 
that she had an opportun she could not resist describ the 
scene to fred, who would not be hinder from immedi go to 
it, affect simpli to pass through. but no sooner did he face 
four ey than he had to rush through the nearest door which 
to lead to the dairi, and there under the high roof and among the 
he gave wai to laughter which made a hollow reson perfectli 
in the kitchen. he fled by anoth doorwai, but mr. jonah, who had 
befor seen fred’s white complexion, long leg, and pinch delicaci 
face, prepar mani sarcasm in which these point of appear 
wittili combin with the lowest moral attribut.

“why, tom, _you_ don’t wear such gentlemanli trouser—you haven’t 
half such fine long leg,” said jonah to hi nephew, wink at 
same time, to impli that there wa someth more in these 
than their undeni. tom look at hi leg, but left 
uncertain whether he prefer hi moral advantag to a more 
length of limb and reprehens gentil of trouser.

in the larg wainscot parlor too there were constantli pair of 
on the watch, and own rel eager to be “sitter-up.” mani came,
lunch, and depart, but brother solomon and the ladi who had 
jane featherston for twenti-five year befor she wa mr. waul 
it good to be there everi dai for hour, without other 
occup than that of observ the cun mari garth (who wa 
deep that she could be found out in noth) and give occasion 
wrinkli indic of cry—as if capabl of torrent in a 
season—at the thought that thei were not allow to go into mr.
featherston’s room. for the old man’s dislik of hi own famili 
to get stronger as he got less abl to amus himself by sai 
thing to them. too languid to sting, he had the more venom refluent 
hi blood.

not fulli believ the messag sent through mari garth, thei 
present themselv togeth within the door of the bedroom, both 
black—mr. waul have a white handkerchief partial unfold in 
hand—and both with face in a sort of half-mourn purpl; while mr.
vinci with her pink cheek and pink ribbon fly wa 
administ a cordial to their own brother, and 
light-complexion fred, hi short hair curl as might be expect 
a gambler’s, wa loll at hi eas in a larg chair.

old featherston no sooner caught sight of these funer 
appear in spite of hi order than rage came to strengthen him 
successfulli than the cordial. he wa prop up on a bed-rest, 
alwai had hi gold-head stick ly by him. he seiz it now 
swept it backward and forward in as larg an area as he could,
appar to ban these ugli spectr, cry in a hoars sort 
screech—

“back, back, mr. waul! back, solomon!”

“oh, brother. peter,” mr. waul began—but solomon put hi hand 
her repressingli. he wa a larg-cheek man, nearli seventi, 
small furtiv ey, and wa not onli of much blander temper but 
himself much deeper than hi brother peter; inde not like to 
deceiv in ani of hi fellow-men, inasmuch as thei could not well 
more greedi and deceit than he suspect them of be. even 
invis power, he thought, were like to be sooth by a 
parenthesi here and there—come from a man of properti, who 
have been as impiou as other.

“brother peter,” he said, in a wheedl yet grave offici tone,
“it’s noth but right i should speak to you about the three 
and the manganes. the almighti know what i’ve got on my mind—”

“then he know more than i want to know,” said peter, lai down 
stick with a show of truce which had a threat in it too, for 
revers the stick so as to make the gold handl a club in case 
closer fight, and look hard at solomon’s bald head.

“there’s thing you might repent of, brother, for want of speak 
me,” said solomon, not advanc, howev. “i could sit up with 
to-night, and jane with me, willingli, and you might take your own 
to speak, or let me speak.”

“ye, i shall take my own time—you needn’t offer me your,” said peter.

“but you can’t take your own time to die in, brother,” began mr.
waul, with her usual woolli tone. “and when you lie speechless you 
be tire of have stranger about you, and you mai think of me and 
children”—but here her voic broke under the touch thought which 
wa attribut to her speechless brother; the mention of 
be natur affect.

“no, i shan’t,” said old featherston, contradicti. “i shan’
think of ani of you. i’ve made my will, i tell you, i’ve made my will.”
here he turn hi head toward mr. vinci, and swallow some more 
hi cordial.

“some peopl would be asham to fill up a place belong by right 
other,” said mr. waul, turn her narrow ey in the 
direct.

“oh, sister,” said solomon, with iron soft, “you and me ar 
fine, and handsom, and clever enough: we must be humbl and let 
peopl push themselv befor us.”

fred’s spirit could not bear thi: rise and look at mr.
featherston, he said, “shall my mother and i leav the room, sir, 
you mai be alon with your friend?”

“sit down, i tell you,” said old featherston, snappishli. “stop 
you ar. good-by, solomon,” he ad, try to wield hi stick again,
but fail now that he had revers the handl. “good-by, mr. waul.
don’t you come again.”

“i shall be down-stair, brother, whether or no,” said solomon. “
shall do my duti, and it remain to be seen what the almighti 
allow.”

“ye, in properti go out of famili,” said mr. waul, 
continu,—“and where there’s steadi young men to carri on. but 
piti them who ar not such, and i piti their mother. good-by, 
peter.”

“rememb, i’m the eldest after you, brother, and prosper from 
first, just as you did, and have got land alreadi by the name 
featherston,” said solomon, reli much on that reflect, as 
which might be suggest in the watch of the night. “but i bid 
good-by for the present.”

their exit wa hasten by their see old mr. featherston pull 
wig on each side and shut hi ey with hi mouth-widen grimac, 
if he were determin to be deaf and blind.

none the less thei came to stone court daili and sat below at the 
of duti, sometim carri on a slow dialogu in an underton in 
the observ and respons were so far apart, that ani on 
them might have imagin himself listen to speak automata, 
some doubt whether the ingeni mechan would realli work, or 
itself up for a long time in order to stick and be silent. solomon 
jane would have been sorri to be quick: what that led to might be 
on the other side of the wall in the person of brother jonah.

but their watch in the wainscot parlor wa sometim vari by 
presenc of other guest from far or near. now that peter 
wa up-stair, hi properti could be discuss with all that 
enlighten to be found on the spot: some rural and 
neighbor express much agreement with the famili and sympathi 
their interest against the vinci, and feminin visitor were 
move to tear, in convers with mr. waul, when thei recal 
fact that thei themselv had been disappoint in time past 
codicil and marriag for spite on the part of ungrat 
gentlemen, who, it might have been suppos, had been spare 
someth better. such convers paus suddenli, like an organ 
the bellow ar let drop, if mari garth came into the room; and 
ey were turn on her as a possibl legate, or on who might 
access to iron chest.

but the younger men who were rel or connect of the famili,
were dispos to admir her in thi problemat light, as a girl 
show much conduct, and who among all the chanc that were 
might turn out to be at least a moder prize. henc she had her 
of compliment and polit attent.

especi from mr. borthrop trumbul, a distinguish bachelor 
auction of those part, much concern in the sale of land 
cattl: a public charact, inde, whose name wa seen on 
distribut placard, and who might reason be sorri for those 
did not know of him. he wa second cousin to peter featherston, 
had been treat by him with more amen than ani other rel,
be us in matter of busi; and in that programm of 
funer which the old man had himself dictat, he had been name as 
bearer. there wa no odiou cupid in mr. borthrop trumbul—
more than a sincer sens of hi own merit, which, he wa awar, 
case of rivalri might tell against competitor; so that if 
featherston, who so far as he, trumbul, wa concern, had 
like as good a soul as ever breath, should have done 
handsom by him, all he could sai wa, that he had never fish 
fawn, but had advis him to the best of hi experi, which 
extend over twenti year from the time of hi apprenticeship 
fifteen, and wa like to yield a knowledg of no surreptiti kind.
hi admir wa far from be confin to himself, but 
accustom profession as well as privat to delight in 
thing at a high rate. he wa an amateur of superior phrase, and 
us poor languag without immedi correct himself—which 
fortun, as he wa rather loud, and given to predomin, stand 
walk about frequent, pull down hi waistcoat with the air of 
man who is veri much of hi own opinion, trim himself rapidli 
hi fore-finger, and mark each new seri in these movement by 
busi plai with hi larg seal. there wa occasion a 
fierc in hi demeanor, but it wa direct chiefli against 
opinion, of which there is so much to correct in the world that a 
of some read and experi necessarili ha hi patienc tri. 
felt that the featherston famili gener wa of 
understand, but be a man of the world and a public charact,
took everyth as a matter of cours, and even went to convers 
mr. jonah and young cranch in the kitchen, not doubt that he 
impress the latter greatli by hi lead question concern 
chalki flat. if anybodi had observ that mr. borthrop trumbul, 
an auction, wa bound to know the natur of everyth, he 
have smile and trim himself silent with the sens that he 
pretti near that. on the whole, in an auction wai, he wa 
honor man, not asham of hi busi, and feel that “
celebr peel, now sir robert,” if introduc to him, would not 
to recogn hi import.

“i don’t mind if i have a slice of that ham, and a glass of that al,
miss garth, if you will allow me,” he said, come into the parlor 
half-past eleven, after have had the except privileg of 
old featherston, and stand with hi back to the fire between mr.
waul and solomon.

“it’s not necessari for you to go out;—let me ring the bell.”

“thank you,” said mari, “i have an errand.”

“well, mr. trumbul, you’re highli favor,” said mr. waul.

“what! see the old man?” said the auction, plai with hi 
dispassion. “ah, you see he ha reli on me consider.” 
he press hi lip togeth, and frown medit.

“might anybodi ask what their brother ha been sai?” said solomon,
in a soft tone of humil, in which he had a sens of 
cun, he be a rich man and not in need of it.

“oh ye, anybodi mai ask,” said mr. trumbul, with loud 
good-humor though cut sarcasm. “anybodi mai interrog. ani 
mai give their remark an interrog turn,” he continu, 
sonor rise with hi style. “thi is constantli done by 
speaker, even when thei anticip no answer. it is what we call 
figur of speech—speech at a high figur, as on mai sai.” the 
auction smile at hi own ingenu.

“i shouldn’t be sorri to hear he’d rememb you, mr. trumbul,” 
solomon. “i never wa against the deserv. it’s the undeserv i’
against.”

“ah, there it is, you see, there it is,” said mr. trumbul,
significantli. “it can’t be deni that undeserv peopl have 
legate, and even residuari legate. it is so, with 
disposit.” again he purs up hi lip and frown a littl.

“do you mean to sai for certain, mr. trumbul, that my brother ha 
hi land awai from our famili?” said mr. waul, on whom, as 
unhop woman, those long word had a depress effect.

“a man might as well turn hi land into chariti land at onc as 
it to some peopl,” observ solomon, hi sister’s question 
drawn no answer.

“what, blue-coat land?” said mr. waul, again. “oh, mr. trumbul, 
never can mean to sai that. it would be fly in the face of 
almighti that’s prosper him.”

while mr. waul wa speak, mr. borthrop trumbul walk awai 
the fireplac toward the window, patrol with hi fore-finger 
the insid of hi stock, then along hi whisker and the curv of 
hair. he now walk to miss garth’s work-tabl, open a book which 
there and read the titl aloud with pompou emphasi as if he 
offer it for sale:

“‘ann of geierstein’ (pronounc jeersteen) or the ‘maiden of 
mist, by the author of waverlei.’” then turn the page, he 
sonor—“the cours of four centuri ha well-nigh elaps 
the seri of event which ar relat in the follow chapter 
place on the contin.” he pronounc the last truli admir 
with the accent on the last syllabl, not as unawar of vulgar usag,
but feel that thi novel deliveri enhanc the sonor beauti 
hi read had given to the whole.

and now the servant came in with the trai, so that the moment 
answer mr. waul’s question had gone by safe, while she 
solomon, watch mr. trumbul’s movement, were think that 
learn interf sadli with seriou affair. mr. borthrop 
realli knew noth about old featherston’s will; but he could 
have been brought to declar ani ignor unless he had been 
for mispris of treason.

“i shall take a mere mouth of ham and a glass of al,” he said,
reassuringli. “as a man with public busi, i take a snack when 
can. i will back thi ham,” he ad, after swallow some 
with alarm hast, “against ani ham in the three kingdom. in 
opinion it is better than the ham at freshitt hall—and i think i am 
toler judg.”

“some don’t like so much sugar in their ham,” said mr. waul. “but 
poor brother would alwai have sugar.”

“if ani person demand better, he is at liberti to do so; but, 
bless me, what an aroma! i should be glad to bui in that qualiti, 
know. there is some gratif to a gentleman”—here mr. trumbul’
voic convei an emot remonstr—“in have thi kind of 
set on hi tabl.”

he push asid hi plate, pour out hi glass of al and drew 
chair a littl forward, profit by the occas to look at the 
side of hi leg, which he stroke approvingli—mr. trumbul have 
those less frivol air and gestur which distinguish 
predomin race of the north.

“you have an interest work there, i see, miss garth,” he observ,
when mari re-enter. “it is by the author of ‘waverlei’: that is 
walter scott. i have bought on of hi work myself—a veri nice thing,
a veri superior public, entitl ‘ivanho.’ you will not get 
writer to beat him in a hurri, i think—he will not, in my opinion, 
speedili surpass. i have just been read a portion at 
commenc of ‘ann of jeersteen.’ it commenc well.” (thing 
began with mr. borthrop trumbul: thei alwai commenc, both 
privat life and on hi handbil.) “you ar a reader, i see. do 
subscrib to our middlemarch librari?”

“no,” said mari. “mr. fred vinci brought thi book.”

“i am a great bookman myself,” return mr. trumbul. “i have no 
than two hundr volum in calf, and i flatter myself thei ar 
select. also pictur by murillo, ruben, tenier, titian, vandyck,
and other. i shall be happi to lend you ani work you like to mention,
miss garth.”

“i am much oblig,” said mari, hasten awai again, “but i 
littl time for read.”

“i should sai my brother ha done someth for _her_ in hi will,”
said mr. solomon, in a veri low underton, when she had shut the 
behind her, point with hi head toward the absent mari.

“hi first wife wa a poor match for him, though,” said mr. waul.
“she brought him noth: and thi young woman is onli her niec,—
veri proud. and my brother ha alwai paid her wage.”

“a sensibl girl though, in my opinion,” said mr. trumbul, 
hi al and start up with an emphat adjust of hi waistcoat.
“i have observ her when she ha been mix medicin in drop. 
mind what she is do, sir. that is a great point in a woman, and 
great point for our friend up-stair, poor dear old soul. a man 
life is of ani valu should think of hi wife as a nurs: that is 
i should do, if i marri; and i believ i have live singl 
enough not to make a mistak in that line. some men must marri 
elev themselv a littl, but when i am in need of that, i hope 
on will tell me so—i hope some individu will appris me of the fact.
i wish you good morn, mr. waul. good morn, mr. solomon. i 
we shall meet under less melancholi auspic.”

when mr. trumbul had depart with a fine bow, solomon, 
forward, observ to hi sister, “you mai depend, jane, my brother 
left that girl a lump sum.”

“anybodi would think so, from the wai mr. trumbul talk,” said jane.
then, after a paus, “he talk as if my daughter wasn’t to be 
to give drop.”

“auction talk wild,” said solomon. “not but what trumbul ha 
monei.”




chapter xxxiii.

“close up hi ey and draw the curtain close;
and let us all to medit.”
—2 _henri vi_.


that night after twelv o’clock mari garth reliev the watch in mr.
featherston’s room, and sat there alon through the small hour. 
often chose thi task, in which she found some pleasur,
notwithstand the old man’s testi whenev he demand 
attent. there were interv in which she could sit 
still, enjoi the outer still and the subdu light. the red 
with it gentli audibl movement seem like a solemn exist 
independ of the petti passion, the imbecil desir, the 
after worthless uncertainti, which were daili move her contempt.
mari wa fond of her own thought, and could amus herself well 
in twilight with her hand in her lap; for, have earli had 
reason to believ that thing were not like to be arrang for 
peculiar satisfact, she wast no time in astonish and 
at that fact. and she had alreadi come to take life veri much as 
comedi in which she had a proud, nai, a gener resolut not to 
the mean or treacher part. mari might have becom cynic if she 
not had parent whom she honor, and a well of affection 
within her, which wa all the fuller becaus she had learn to make 
unreason claim.

she sat to-night revolv, as she wa wont, the scene of the dai, 
lip often curl with amus at the odditi to which her 
ad fresh drolleri: peopl were so ridicul with their illus,
carri their fool’s cap unawar, think their own li 
while everybodi els’s were transpar, make themselv 
to everyth, as if when all the world look yellow under a lamp 
alon were rosi. yet there were some illus under mari’s ey 
were not quit comic to her. she wa secretli convinc, though she 
no other ground than her close observ of old featherston’
natur, that in spite of hi fond for have the vinci about him,
thei were as like to be disappoint as ani of the relat whom 
kept at a distanc. she had a good deal of disdain for mr. vinci’
evid alarm lest she and fred should be alon togeth, but it 
not hinder her from think anxious of the wai in which fred 
be affect, if it should turn out that hi uncl had left him as 
as ever. she could make a butt of fred when he wa present, but she 
not enjoi hi folli when he wa absent.

yet she like her thought: a vigor young mind not overbalanc 
passion, find a good in make acquaint with life, and watch 
own power with interest. mari had plenti of merriment within.

her thought wa not vein by ani solemn or patho about the old 
on the bed: such sentiment ar easier to affect than to feel about 
ag creatur whose life is not visibl anyth but a remnant 
vice. she had alwai seen the most disagre side of mr.
featherston: he wa not proud of her, and she wa onli us to him.
to be anxiou about a soul that is alwai snap at you must be 
to the saint of the earth; and mari wa not on of them. she had 
return him a harsh word, and had wait on him faithfulli: that 
her utmost. old featherston himself wa not in the least anxiou 
hi soul, and had declin to see mr. tucker on the subject.

to-night he had not snap, and for the first hour or two he 
remark still, until at last mari heard him rattl hi bunch 
kei against the tin box which he alwai kept in the bed besid him.
about three o’clock he said, with remark distinct, “missi, 
here!”

mari obei, and found that he had alreadi drawn the tin box from 
the cloth, though he usual ask to have thi done for him; and 
had select the kei. he now unlock the box, and, draw from 
anoth kei, look straight at her with ey that seem to 
recov all their sharp and said, “how mani of ’em ar in 
hous?”

“you mean of your own relat, sir,” said mari, well us to the 
man’s wai of speech. he nod slightli and she went on.

“mr. jonah featherston and young cranch ar sleep here.”

“oh ay, thei stick, do thei? and the rest—thei come everi dai, i’
warrant—solomon and jane, and all the young un? thei come peep, 
count and cast up?”

“not all of them everi dai. mr. solomon and mr. waul ar here 
dai, and the other come often.”

the old man listen with a grimac while she spoke, and then said,
relax hi face, “the more fool thei. you hearken, missi. it’s 
o’clock in the morn, and i’ve got all my faculti as well as ever 
had in my life. i know all my properti, and where the monei’s put out,
and everyth. and i’ve made everyth readi to chang my mind, 
do as i like at the last. do you hear, missi? i’ve got my faculti.”

“well, sir?” said mari, quietli.

he now lower hi tone with an air of deeper cun. “i’ve made 
will, and i’m go to burn on. now you do as i tell you. thi is 
kei of my iron chest, in the closet there. you push well at the side 
the brass plate at the top, till it goe like a bolt: then you can 
the kei in the front lock and turn it. see and do that; and take 
the topmost paper—last will and testament—big print.”

“no, sir,” said mari, in a firm voic, “i cannot do that.”

“not do it? i tell you, you must,” said the old man, hi 
begin to shake under the shock of thi resist.

“i cannot touch your iron chest or your will. i must refus to 
anyth that might lai me open to suspicion.”

“i tell you, i’m in my right mind. shan’t i do as i like at the last? 
made two will on purpos. take the kei, i sai.”

“no, sir, i will not,” said mari, more resolut still. her 
wa get stronger.

“i tell you, there’s no time to lose.”

“i cannot help that, sir. i will not let the close of your life 
the begin of mine. i will not touch your iron chest or your will.”
she move to a littl distanc from the bedsid.

the old man paus with a blank stare for a littl while, hold 
on kei erect on the ring; then with an agit jerk he began to 
with hi boni left hand at empti the tin box befor him.

“missi,” he began to sai, hurriedli, “look here! take the monei—
note and gold—look here—take it—you shall have it all—do as i 
you.”

he made an effort to stretch out the kei toward her as far 
possibl, and mari again retreat.

“i will not touch your kei or your monei, sir. prai don’t ask me to 
it again. if you do, i must go and call your brother.”

he let hi hand fall, and for the first time in her life mari saw 
peter featherston begin to cry childishli. she said, in as gentl 
tone as she could command, “prai put up your monei, sir;” and then 
awai to her seat by the fire, hope thi would help to convinc 
that it wa useless to sai more. present he ralli and said eagerli—

“look here, then. call the young chap. call fred vinci.”

mari’s heart began to beat more quickli. variou idea rush 
her mind as to what the burn of a second will might impli. she 
to make a difficult decis in a hurri.

“i will call him, if you will let me call mr. jonah and other 
him.”

“nobodi els, i sai. the young chap. i shall do as i like.”

“wait till broad daylight, sir, when everi on is stir. or let 
call simmon now, to go and fetch the lawyer? he can be here in 
than two hour.”

“lawyer? what do i want with the lawyer? nobodi shall know—i sai,
nobodi shall know. i shall do as i like.”

“let me call some on els, sir,” said mari, persuas. she did 
like her posit—alon with the old man, who seem to show a 
flare of nervou energi which enabl him to speak again and 
without fall into hi usual cough; yet she desir not to 
unnecessarili the contradict which agit him. “let me, prai, 
some on els.”

“you let me alon, i sai. look here, missi. take the monei. you’
never have the chanc again. it’s pretti nigh two hundr—there’s 
in the box, and nobodi know how much there wa. take it and do as 
tell you.”

mari, stand by the fire, saw it red light fall on the old man,
prop up on hi pillow and bed-rest, with hi boni hand hold 
the kei, and the monei ly on the quilt befor him. she never 
that vision of a man want to do as he like at the last. but the 
in which he had put the offer of the monei urg her to speak 
harder resolut than ever.

“it is of no us, sir. i will not do it. put up your monei. i will 
touch your monei. i will do anyth els i can to comfort you; but 
will not touch your kei or your monei.”

“anyth els—anyth els!” said old featherston, with hoars rage,
which, as if in a nightmar, tri to be loud, and yet wa onli 
audibl. “i want noth els. you come here—you come here.”

mari approach him cautious, know him too well. she saw 
drop hi kei and try to grasp hi stick, while he look at 
like an ag hyena, the muscl of hi face get distort with 
effort of hi hand. she paus at a safe distanc.

“let me give you some cordial,” she said, quietli, “and try to 
yourself. you will perhap go to sleep. and to-morrow by daylight 
can do as you like.”

he lift the stick, in spite of her be beyond hi reach, and 
it with a hard effort which wa but impot. it fell, slip 
the foot of the bed. mari let it lie, and retreat to her chair by 
fire. by-and-by she would go to him with the cordial. fatigu 
make him passiv. it wa get toward the chillest moment of 
morn, the fire had got low, and she could see through the 
between the moreen window-curtain the light whiten by the blind.
have put some wood on the fire and thrown a shawl over her, she 
down, hope that mr. featherston might now fall asleep. if she 
near him the irrit might be kept up. he had said noth 
throw the stick, but she had seen him take hi kei again 
lai hi right hand on the monei. he did not put it up, howev, 
she thought that he wa drop off to sleep.

but mari herself began to be more agit by the remembr of 
she had gone through, than she had been by the realiti—
those act of her which had come imper and exclud 
question in the critic moment.

present the dry wood sent out a flame which illumin 
crevic, and mari saw that the old man wa ly quietli with hi 
turn a littl on on side. she went toward him with inaud step,
and thought that hi face look strang motionless; but the 
moment the movement of the flame commun itself to all 
made her uncertain. the violent beat of her heart render 
percept so doubt that even when she touch him and listen 
hi breath, she could not trust her conclus. she went to 
window and gentli prop asid the curtain and blind, so that 
still light of the sky fell on the bed.

the next moment she ran to the bell and rang it energet. in 
veri littl while there wa no longer ani doubt that peter 
wa dead, with hi right hand clasp the kei, and hi left 
ly on the heap of note and gold.




book iv.
three love problem.




chapter xxxiv.

“1_st gent_. such men as thi ar feather, chip, and straw,
    carri no weight, no forc.

2_d gent_. but 
    is causal too, and make the sum of weight.
    for power find it place in lack of power;
    advanc is cession, and the driven 
    mai run aground becaus the helmsman’s 
    lack forc to balanc opposit.”


it wa on a morn of mai that peter featherston wa buri. in 
prosaic neighborhood of middlemarch, mai wa not alwai warm and sunni,
and on thi particular morn a chill wind wa blow the 
from the surround garden on to the green mound of 
churchyard. swiftli move cloud onli now and then allow a gleam 
light up ani object, whether ugli or beauti, that happen to 
within it golden shower. in the churchyard the object were 
variou, for there wa a littl countri crowd wait to see 
funer. the new had spread that it wa to be a “big buri;” the 
gentleman had left written direct about everyth and meant 
have a funer “beyond hi better.” thi wa true; for 
featherston had not been a harpagon whose passion had all 
devour by the ever-lean and ever-hungri passion of save, and 
would drive a bargain with hi undertak beforehand. he love monei,
but he also love to spend it in gratifi hi peculiar tast, 
perhap he love it best of all as a mean of make other feel 
power more or less uncomfort. if ani on will here contend 
there must have been trait of good in old featherston, i will 
presum to deni thi; but i must observ that good is of a 
natur, easili discourag, and when much privaci, elbow in 
life by unabash vice, is apt to retir into extrem privaci, so 
it is more easili believ in by those who construct a selfish 
gentleman theoret, than by those who form the narrow 
base on hi person acquaint. in ani case, he had been bent 
have a handsom funer, and on have person “bid” to it who 
rather have stai at home. he had even desir that femal 
should follow him to the grave, and poor sister martha had taken 
difficult journei for thi purpos from the chalki flat. she and 
would have been altogeth cheer (in a tear manner) by thi 
that a brother who dislik see them while he wa live had 
prospect fond of their presenc when he should have becom 
testat, if the sign had not been made equivoc by be extend 
mr. vinci, whose expens in handsom crape seem to impli the 
presumptu hope, aggrav by a bloom of complexion which 
pretti plainli that she wa not a blood-relat, but of that 
objection class call wife’s kin.

we ar all of us imagin in some form or other, for imag ar 
brood of desir; and poor old featherston, who laugh much at the 
in which other cajol themselv, did not escap the fellowship 
illus. in write the programm for hi burial he certainli did 
make clear to himself that hi pleasur in the littl drama of which 
form a part wa confin to anticip. in chuckl over 
vexat he could inflict by the rigid clutch of hi dead hand, 
inevit mingl hi conscious with that livid stagnant presenc,
and so far as he wa preoccupi with a futur life, it wa with on 
gratif insid hi coffin. thu old featherston wa imagin,
after hi fashion.

howev, the three mourn-coach were fill accord to 
written order of the deceas. there were pall-bearer on horseback,
with the richest scarf and hatband, and even the under-bearer 
trap of woe which were of a good well-price qualiti. the 
process, when dismount, look the larger for the small of 
churchyard; the heavi human face and the black draperi shiver 
the wind seem to tell of a world strang incongru with 
lightli drop blossom and the gleam of sunshin on the daisi.
the clergyman who met the process wa mr. cadwallad—also 
to the request of peter featherston, prompt as usual by 
reason. have a contempt for curat, whom he alwai 
understrapp, he wa resolv to be buri by a benef clergyman.
mr. casaubon wa out of the question, not mere becaus he 
duti of thi sort, but becaus featherston had an especi dislik 
him as the rector of hi own parish, who had a lien on the land in 
shape of tith, also as the deliver of morn sermon, which the 
man, be in hi pew and not at all sleepi, had been oblig to 
through with an inward snarl. he had an object to a parson stuck 
abov hi head preach to him. but hi relat with mr. 
had been of a differ kind: the trout-stream which ran through mr.
casaubon’s land took it cours through featherston’s also, so 
mr. cadwallad wa a parson who had had to ask a favor instead 
preach. moreov, he wa on of the high gentri live four 
awai from lowick, and wa thu exalt to an equal sky with the 
of the counti and other digniti vagu regard as necessari to 
system of thing. there would be a satisfact in be buri by mr.
cadwallad, whose veri name offer a fine opportun for 
wrongli if you like.

thi distinct confer on the rector of tipton and freshitt wa 
reason why mr. cadwallad made on of the group that watch 
featherston’s funer from an upper window of the manor. she wa 
fond of visit that hous, but she like, as she said, to 
collect of strang anim such as there would be at thi funer;
and she had persuad sir jame and the young ladi chettam to drive 
rector and herself to lowick in order that the visit might 
altogeth pleasant.

“i will go anywher with you, mr. cadwallad,” celia had said; “but 
don’t like funer.”

“oh, my dear, when you have a clergyman in your famili you 
accommod your tast: i did that veri earli. when i marri 
i made up my mind to like sermon, and i set out by like the end 
much. that soon spread to the middl and the begin, becaus 
couldn’t have the end without them.”

“no, to be sure not,” said the dowag ladi chettam, with 
emphasi.

the upper window from which the funer could be well seen wa in 
room occupi by mr. casaubon when he had been forbidden to work; 
he had resum nearli hi habitu style of life now in spite 
warn and prescript, and after polit welcom mr.
cadwallad had slip again into the librari to chew a cud of 
mistak about cush and mizraim.

but for her visitor dorothea too might have been shut up in 
librari, and would not have wit thi scene of old featherston’
funer, which, aloof as it seem to be from the tenor of her life,
alwai afterward came back to her at the touch of certain 
point in memori, just as the vision of st. peter’s at rome wa 
with mood of despond. scene which make vital chang in 
neighbor’ lot ar but the background of our own, yet, like 
particular aspect of the field and tree, thei becom associ 
us with the epoch of our own histori, and make a part of that 
which li in the select of our keenest conscious.

the dream-like associ of someth alien and ill-understood 
the deepest secret of her experi seem to mirror that sens 
loneli which wa due to the veri ardor of dorothea’s natur. 
countri gentri of old time live in a rarefi social air: dot 
on their station up the mountain thei look down with 
discrimin on the belt of thicker life below. and dorothea wa 
at eas in the perspect and chilli of that height.

“i shall not look ani more,” said celia, after the train had 
the church, place herself a littl behind her husband’s elbow so 
she could slyli touch hi coat with her cheek. “i dare sai dodo 
it: she is fond of melancholi thing and ugli peopl.”

“i am fond of know someth about the peopl i live among,” 
dorothea, who had been watch everyth with the interest of a 
on hi holidai tour. “it seem to me we know noth of our neighbor,
unless thei ar cottag. on is constantli wonder what sort 
live other peopl lead, and how thei take thing. i am quit 
to mr. cadwallad for come and call me out of the librari.”

“quit right to feel oblig to me,” said mr. cadwallad. “your 
lowick farmer ar as curiou as ani buffalo or bison, and i 
sai you don’t half see them at church. thei ar quit differ 
your uncl’s tenant or sir jame’s—monster—farmer 
landlord—on can’t tell how to class them.”

“most of these follow ar not lowick peopl,” said sir jame; “
suppos thei ar legate from a distanc, or from middlemarch.
lovegood tell me the old fellow ha left a good deal of monei as 
as land.”

“think of that now! when so mani younger son can’t dine at their 
expens,” said mr. cadwallad. “ah,” turn round at the sound 
the open door, “here is mr. brook. i felt that we were 
befor, and here is the explan. you ar come to see thi 
funer, of cours?”

“no, i came to look after casaubon—to see how he goe on, you know. 
to bring a littl new—a littl new, my dear,” said mr. brook,
nod at dorothea as she came toward him. “i look into 
librari, and i saw casaubon over hi book. i told him it wouldn’t do:
i said, ‘thi will never do, you know: think of your wife, casaubon.’
and he promis me to come up. i didn’t tell him my new: i said, 
must come up.”

“ah, now thei ar come out of church,” mr. cadwallad exclaim.
“dear me, what a wonderfulli mix set! mr. lydgat as doctor, 
suppos. but that is realli a good look woman, and the fair 
man must be her son. who ar thei, sir jame, do you know?”

“i see vinci, the mayor of middlemarch; thei ar probabl hi wife 
son,” said sir jame, look interrog at mr. brook, who 
and said—

“ye, a veri decent famili—a veri good fellow is vinci; a credit to 
manufactur interest. you have seen him at my hous, you know.”

“ah, ye: on of your secret committe,” said mr. cadwallad,
provokingli.

“a cours fellow, though,” said sir jame, with a fox-hunter’
disgust.

“and on of those who suck the life out of the wretch 
weaver in tipton and freshitt. that is how hi famili look so fair 
sleek,” said mr. cadwallad. “those dark, purpl-face peopl ar 
excel foil. dear me, thei ar like a set of jug! do look 
humphrei: on might fanci him an ugli archangel tower abov them 
hi white surplic.”

“it’s a solemn thing, though, a funer,” said mr. brook, “if you 
it in that light, you know.”

“but i am not take it in that light. i can’t wear my solemn 
often, els it will go to rag. it wa time the old man di, and 
of these peopl ar sorri.”

“how piteou!” said dorothea. “thi funer seem to me the most 
thing i ever saw. it is a blot on the morn. i cannot bear to 
that ani on should die and leav no love behind.”

she wa go to sai more, but she saw her husband enter and 
himself a littl in the background. the differ hi presenc made 
her wa not alwai a happi on: she felt that he often 
object to her speech.

“posit,” exclaim mr. cadwallad, “there is a new face come 
from behind that broad man queerer than ani of them: a littl 
head with bulg ey—a sort of frog-face—do look. he must be 
anoth blood, i think.”

“let me see!” said celia, with awaken curios, stand behind mr.
cadwallad and lean forward over her head. “oh, what an odd face!”
then with a quick chang to anoth sort of surpris express, 
ad, “why, dodo, you never told me that mr. ladislaw wa come again!”

dorothea felt a shock of alarm: everi on notic her sudden 
as she look up immedi at her uncl, while mr. casaubon look 
her.

“he came with me, you know; he is my guest—put up with me at 
grang,” said mr. brook, in hi easiest tone, nod at dorothea, 
if the announc were just what she might have expect. “and 
have brought the pictur at the top of the carriag. i knew you 
be pleas with the surpris, casaubon. there you ar to the 
life—as aquina, you know. quit the right sort of thing. and you 
hear young ladislaw talk about it. he talk uncommonli well—point 
thi, that, and the other—know art and everyth of 
kind—companion, you know—is up with you in ani track—what i’ve 
want a long while.”

mr. casaubon bow with cold polit, master hi irrit, 
onli so far as to be silent. he rememb will’s letter quit as 
as dorothea did; he had notic that it wa not among the letter 
had been reserv for him on hi recoveri, and secretli conclud 
dorothea had sent word to will not to come to lowick, he had 
with proud sensit from ever recur to the subject. he 
infer that she had ask her uncl to invit will to the grang; 
she felt it imposs at that moment to enter into ani explan.

mr. cadwallad’s ey, divert from the churchyard, saw a good 
of dumb show which wa not so intellig to her as she could 
desir, and could not repress the question, “who is mr. ladislaw?”

“a young rel of mr. casaubon’s,” said sir jame, promptli. 
good-natur often made him quick and clear-see in person matter,
and he had divin from dorothea’s glanc at her husband that there 
some alarm in her mind.

“a veri nice young fellow—casaubon ha done everyth for him,”
explain mr. brook. “he repai your expens in him, casaubon,” 
went on, nod encouragingli. “i hope he will stai with me a 
while and we shall make someth of my document. i have plenti 
idea and fact, you know, and i can see he is just the man to put 
into shape—rememb what the right quotat ar, _omn 
punctum_, and that sort of thing—give subject a kind of turn. 
invit him some time ago when you were ill, casaubon; dorothea 
you couldn’t have anybodi in the hous, you know, and she ask me 
write.”

poor dorothea felt that everi word of her uncl’s wa about as 
as a grain of sand in the ey to mr. casaubon. it would be 
unfit now to explain that she had not wish her uncl to 
will ladislaw. she could not in the least make clear to herself 
reason for her husband’s dislik to hi presenc—a dislik 
impress on her by the scene in the librari; but she felt 
unbecoming of sai anyth that might convei a notion of it 
other. mr. casaubon, inde, had not thoroughli repres 
mix reason to himself; irrit feel with him, as with all 
us, seek rather for justif than for self-knowledg. but 
wish to repress outward sign, and onli dorothea could discern 
chang in her husband’s face befor he observ with more of 
bend and sing-song than usual—

“you ar exceedingli hospit, my dear sir; and i ow 
acknowledg for exercis your hospit toward a rel 
mine.”

the funer wa end now, and the churchyard wa be clear.

“now you can see him, mr. cadwallad,” said celia. “he is just like 
miniatur of mr. casaubon’s aunt that hang in dorothea’s boudoir—
nice-look.”

“a veri pretti sprig,” said mr. cadwallad, dryli. “what is 
nephew to be, mr. casaubon?”

“pardon me, he is not my nephew. he is my cousin.”

“well, you know,” interpos mr. brook, “he is try hi wing. he 
just the sort of young fellow to rise. i should be glad to give him 
opportun. he would make a good secretari, now, like hobb, milton,
swift—that sort of man.”

“i understand,” said mr. cadwallad. “on who can write speech.”

“i’ll fetch him in now, eh, casaubon?” said mr. brook. “he wouldn’
come in till i had announc him, you know. and we’ll go down and 
at the pictur. there you ar to the life: a deep subtl sort 
thinker with hi fore-finger on the page, while saint bonaventur 
somebodi els, rather fat and florid, is look up at the triniti.
everyth is symbol, you know—the higher style of art: i like 
up to a certain point, but not too far—it’s rather strain to keep 
with, you know. but you ar at home in that, casaubon. and 
painter’s flesh is good—solid, transpar, everyth of 
sort. i went into that a great deal at on time. howev, i’ll go 
fetch ladislaw.”




chapter xxxv.

“non, je ne comprend pa de plu charmant 
que de voir d’héritier un troup 
le maintien interdit, et la mine allongé,
lire un long testament où pale, 
on leur laiss un bonsoir avec un pi de nez.
pour voir au naturel leur tristess 
je reviendrai, je croi, exprè de l’autr mond.”
—regnard: _le légatair universel_.


when the anim enter the ark in pair, on mai imagin that 
speci made much privat remark on each other, and were tempt 
think that so mani form feed on the same store of fodder 
emin superflu, as tend to diminish the ration. (i fear 
part plai by the vultur on that occas would be too pain 
art to repres, those bird be disadvantag nake about 
gullet, and appar without rite and ceremoni.)

the same sort of temptat befel the christian carnivora who 
peter featherston’s funer process; most of them have 
mind bent on a limit store which each would have like to get 
most of. the long-recogn blood-relat and connect 
marriag made alreadi a goodli number, which, multipli 
possibl, present a fine rang for jealou conjectur 
pathet hope. jealousi of the vinci had creat a 
in hostil among all person of the featherston blood, so that 
the absenc of ani decid indic that on of themselv wa 
have more than the rest, the dread lest that long-leg fred 
should have the land wa necessarili domin, though it left 
feel and leisur for vaguer jealousi, such as were 
toward mari garth. solomon found time to reflect that jonah 
undeserv, and jonah to abus solomon as greedi; jane, the 
sister, held that martha’s children ought not to expect so much as 
young waul; and martha, more lax on the subject of primogenitur, 
sorri to think that jane wa so “have.” these nearest of kin 
natur impress with the unreason of expect 
cousin and second cousin, and us their arithmet in reckon 
larg sum that small legaci might mount to, if there were too 
of them. two cousin were present to hear the will, and a second 
besid mr. trumbul. thi second cousin wa a middlemarch mercer 
polit manner and superflu aspir. the two cousin were 
men from brass, on of them consciou of claim on the score 
inconveni expens sustain by him in present of oyster and 
eatabl to hi rich cousin peter; the other entir saturnin,
lean hi hand and chin on a stick, and consciou of claim base 
no narrow perform but on merit gener: both blameless 
of brass, who wish that jonah featherston did not live there. 
wit of a famili is usual best receiv among stranger.

“why, trumbul himself is pretti sure of five hundr—_that_ you 
depend,—i shouldn’t wonder if my brother promis him,” said solomon,
muse aloud with hi sister, the even befor the funer.

“dear, dear!” said poor sister martha, whose imagin of 
had been habitu narrow to the amount of her unpaid rent.

but in the morn all the ordinari current of conjectur 
disturb by the presenc of a strang mourner who had plash 
them as if from the moon. thi wa the stranger describ by mr.
cadwallad as frog-face: a man perhap about two or three and thirti,
whose promin ey, thin-lip, downward-curv mouth, and 
sleekli brush awai from a forehead that sank suddenli abov the 
of the eyebrow, certainli gave hi face a batrachian 
of express. here, clearli, wa a new legate; els why wa he 
as a mourner? here were new possibl, rais a new uncertainti,
which almost check remark in the mourn-coach. we ar 
humili by the sudden discoveri of a fact which ha exist 
comfort and perhap been stare at us in privat while we 
been make up our world entir without it. no on had seen 
question stranger befor except mari garth, and she knew 
more of him than that he had twice been to stone court when mr.
featherston wa down-stair, and had sat alon with him for 
hour. she had found an opportun of mention thi to her father,
and perhap caleb’s were the onli ey, except the lawyer’s, 
examin the stranger with more of inquiri than of disgust 
suspicion. caleb garth, have littl expect and less cupid,
wa interest in the verif of hi own guess, and the 
with which he half smilingli rub hi chin and shot 
glanc much as if he were valu a tree, made a fine contrast 
the alarm or scorn visibl in other face when the unknown mourner,
whose name wa understood to be rigg, enter the wainscot parlor 
took hi seat near the door to make part of the audienc when the 
should be read. just then mr. solomon and mr. jonah were gone up-
with the lawyer to search for the will; and mr. waul, see 
vacant seat between herself and mr. borthrop trumbul, had the 
to move next to that great author, who wa handl hi watch-
and trim hi outlin with a determin not to show anyth 
compromis to a man of abil as wonder or surpris.

“i suppos you know everyth about what my poor brother’s done, mr.
trumbul,” said mr. waul, in the lowest of her woolli tone, 
she turn her crape-shadow bonnet toward mr. trumbul’s ear.

“my good ladi, whatev wa told me wa told in confid,” said 
auction, put hi hand up to screen that secret.

“them who’ve made sure of their good-luck mai be disappoint yet,”
mr. waul continu, find some relief in thi commun.

“hope ar often delus,” said mr. trumbul, still in confid.

“ah!” said mr. waul, look across at the vinci, and then 
back to the side of her sister martha.

“it’s wonder how close poor peter wa,” she said, in the 
underton. “we none of us know what he might have had on hi mind. 
onli hope and trust he wasn’t a wors liver than we think of, martha.”

poor mr. cranch wa bulki, and, breath asthmat, had 
addit motiv for make her remark unexception and 
them a gener bear, that even her whisper were loud and liabl 
sudden burst like those of a derang barrel-organ.

“i never _wa_ covet, jane,” she repli; “but i have six 
and have buri three, and i didn’t marri into monei. the eldest, 
sit there, is but nineteen—so i leav you to guess. and stock 
short, and land most awkward. but if ever i’ve beg and prai; it’
been to god abov; though where there’s on brother a bachelor and 
other childless after twice marri—anybodi might think!”

meanwhil, mr. vinci had glanc at the passiv face of mr. rigg, 
had taken out hi snuff-box and tap it, but had put it 
unopen as an indulg which, howev clarifi to the judgment,
wa unsuit to the occas. “i shouldn’t wonder if featherston 
better feel than ani of us gave him credit for,” he observ, 
the ear of hi wife. “thi funer show a thought about everybodi: 
look well when a man want to be follow by hi friend, and if 
ar humbl, not to be asham of them. i should be all the 
pleas if he’d left lot of small legaci. thei mai be 
us to fellow in a small wai.”

“everyth is as handsom as could be, crape and silk and everyth,”
said mr. vinci, contentedli.

but i am sorri to sai that fred wa under some difficulti in 
a laugh, which would have been more unsuit than hi father’
snuff-box. fred had overheard mr. jonah suggest someth about 
“love-child,” and with thi thought in hi mind, the stranger’s face,
which happen to be opposit him, affect him too ludicr. 
garth, discern hi distress in the twitch of hi mouth, and 
recours to a cough, came cleverli to hi rescu by ask him 
chang seat with her, so that he got into a shadowi corner. fred 
feel as good-naturedli as possibl toward everybodi, 
rigg; and have some relent toward all these peopl who were 
lucki than he wa awar of be himself, he would not for the 
have behav amiss; still, it wa particularli easi to laugh.

but the entranc of the lawyer and the two brother drew everi on’
attent. the lawyer wa mr. standish, and he had come to stone 
thi morn believ that he knew thoroughli well who would 
pleas and who disappoint befor the dai wa over. the will 
expect to read wa the last of three which he had drawn up for mr.
featherston. mr. standish wa not a man who vari hi manner: 
behav with the same deep-voic, off-hand civil to everybodi, 
if he saw no differ in them, and talk chiefli of the hai-crop,
which would be “veri fine, by god!” of the last bulletin 
the king, and of the duke of clarenc, who wa a sailor everi inch 
him, and just the man to rule over an island like britain.

old featherston had often reflect as he sat look at the fire 
standish would be surpris some dai: it is true that if he had done 
he like at the last, and burnt the will drawn up by anoth lawyer, 
would not have secur that minor end; still he had had hi pleasur 
rumin on it. and certainli mr. standish wa surpris, but not 
all sorri; on the contrari, he rather enjoi the zest of a 
curios in hi own mind, which the discoveri of a second will 
to the prospect amaz on the part of the featherston famili.

as to the sentiment of solomon and jonah, thei were held in 
suspens: it seem to them that the old will would have a 
valid, and that there might be such an interlac of poor peter’
former and latter intent as to creat endless “law” 
anybodi came by their own—an inconveni which would have at 
the advantag of go all round. henc the brother show 
thoroughli neutral graviti as thei re-enter with mr. standish; 
solomon took out hi white handkerchief again with a sens that in 
case there would be affect passag, and cry at funer, 
dry, wa customarili serv up in lawn.

perhap the person who felt the most throb excit at 
moment wa mari garth, in the conscious that it wa she who 
virtual determin the product of thi second will, which 
have moment effect on the lot of some person present. no 
except herself knew what had pass on that final night.

“the will i hold in my hand,” said mr. standish, who, seat at 
tabl in the middl of the room, took hi time about everyth,
includ the cough with which he show a disposit to clear 
voic, “wa drawn up by myself and execut by our deceas friend 
the 9th of august, 1825. but i find that there is a 
instrument hitherto unknown to me, bear date the 20th of juli, 1826,
hardli a year later than the previou on. and there is farther, 
see”—mr. standish wa cautious travel over the document with 
spectacl—“a codicil to thi latter will, bear date march 1, 1828.”

“dear, dear!” said sister martha, not mean to be audibl, but 
to some articul under thi pressur of date.

“i shall begin by read the earlier will,” continu mr. standish,
“sinc such, as appear by hi not have destroi the document, 
the intent of deceas.”

the preambl wa felt to be rather long, and sever besid 
shook their head pathet, look on the ground: all ey 
meet other ey, and were chiefli fix either on the spot in 
tabl-cloth or on mr. standish’s bald head; except mari garth’s.
when all the rest were try to look nowher in particular, it 
safe for her to look at them. and at the sound of the first “give 
bequeath” she could see all complexion chang subtli, as if 
faint vibrat were pass through them, save that of mr. rigg. 
sat in unalt calm, and, in fact, the compani, preoccupi with 
import problem, and with the complic of listen to 
which might or might not be revok, had ceas to think of him. 
blush, and mr. vinci found it imposs to do without hi snuff-
in hi hand, though he kept it close.

the small bequest came first, and even the recollect that there 
anoth will and that poor peter might have thought better of it, 
not quell the rise disgust and indign. on like to be done 
by in everi tens, past, present, and futur. and here wa 
capabl five year ago of leav onli two hundr apiec to hi 
brother and sister, and onli a hundr apiec to hi own nephew 
niec: the garth were not mention, but mr. vinci and rosamond 
each to have a hundr. mr. trumbul wa to have the gold-head 
and fifti pound; the other second cousin and the cousin present 
each to have the like handsom sum, which, as the saturnin 
observ, wa a sort of legaci that left a man nowher; and there 
much more of such offens dribbl in favor of person 
present—problemat, and, it wa to be fear, low connect.
altogeth, reckon hastili, here were about three thousand 
of. where then had peter meant the rest of the monei to go—and 
the land? and what wa revok and what not revok—and wa 
revoc for better or for wors? all emot must be condit,
and might turn out to be the wrong thing. the men were strong enough 
bear up and keep quiet under thi confus suspens; some let 
lower lip fall, other purs it up, accord to the habit of 
muscl. but jane and martha sank under the rush of question, 
began to cry; poor mr. cranch be half move with the consol 
get ani hundr at all without work for them, and half 
that her share wa scanti; wherea mr. waul’s mind wa 
flood with the sens of be an own sister and get littl, 
somebodi els wa to have much. the gener expect now wa 
the “much” would fall to fred vinci, but the vinci themselv 
surpris when ten thousand pound in specifi invest 
declar to be bequeath to him:—wa the land come too? fred bit 
lip: it wa difficult to help smile, and mr. vinci felt herself 
happiest of women—possibl revoc shrink out of sight in 
dazzl vision.

there wa still a residu of person properti as well as the land, 
the whole wa left to on person, and that person wa—o possibl!
o expect found on the favor of “close” old gentlemen! o 
voc that would still leav express slip helpless from 
measur of mortal folli!—that residuari legate wa joshua rigg,
who wa also sole executor, and who wa to take thenceforth the name 
featherston.

there wa a rustl which seem like a shudder run round 
room. everi on stare afresh at mr. rigg, who appar 
no surpris.

“a most singular testamentari disposit!” exclaim mr. trumbul,
prefer for onc that he should be consid ignor in the past.
“but there is a second will—there is a further document. we have 
yet heard the final wish of the deceas.”

mari garth wa feel that what thei had yet to hear were not 
final wish. the second will revok everyth except the legaci 
the low person befor mention (some alter in these be 
occas of the codicil), and the bequest of all the land ly 
lowick parish with all the stock and household furnitur, to 
rigg. the residu of the properti wa to be devot to the erect 
endow of almshous for old men, to be call featherston’
alm-hous, and to be built on a piec of land near 
alreadi bought for the purpos by the testat, he wish—so 
document declar—to pleas god almighti. nobodi present had 
farth; but mr. trumbul had the gold-head cane. it took some 
for the compani to recov the power of express. mari dare not 
at fred.

mr. vinci wa the first to speak—after us hi snuff-
energet—and he spoke with loud indign. “the 
unaccount will i ever heard! i should sai he wa not in hi 
mind when he made it. i should sai thi last will wa void,” ad mr.
vinci, feel that thi express put the thing in the true light.
“eh standish?”

“our deceas friend alwai knew what he wa about, i think,” said mr.
standish. “everyth is quit regular. here is a letter from 
of brass ti with the will. he drew it up. a veri 
solicitor.”

“i never notic ani alien of mind—ani aberr of intellect 
the late mr. featherston,” said borthrop trumbul, “but i call 
will eccentr. i wa alwai willingli of servic to the old soul; 
he intim pretti plainli a sens of oblig which would 
itself in hi will. the gold-head cane is farcic consid as 
acknowledg to me; but happili i am abov mercenari consider.”

“there’s noth veri surpris in the matter that i can see,” 
caleb garth. “anybodi might have had more reason for wonder if 
will had been what you might expect from an open-mind 
man. for my part, i wish there wa no such thing as a will.”

“that’s a strang sentiment to come from a christian man, by god!” 
the lawyer. “i should like to know how you will back that up, garth!”

“oh,” said caleb, lean forward, adjust hi finger-tip 
niceti and look medit on the ground. it alwai seem to 
that word were the hardest part of “busi.”

but here mr. jonah featherston made himself heard. “well, he 
wa a fine hypocrit, wa my brother peter. but thi will cut 
everyth. if i’d known, a wagon and six hors shouldn’t have 
me from brass. i’ll put a white hat and drab coat on to-morrow.”

“dear, dear,” wept mr. cranch, “and we’ve been at the expens 
travel, and that poor lad sit idl here so long! it’s the 
time i ever heard my brother peter wa so wish to pleas 
almighti; but if i wa to be struck helpless i must sai it’s hard—i 
think no other.”

“it’ll do him no good where he’s gone, that’s my belief,” said solomon,
with a bitter which wa remark genuin, though hi tone 
not help be sly. “peter wa a bad liver, and almshous won’t 
it, when he’s had the impud to show it at the last.”

“and all the while had got hi own law famili—brother and 
and nephew and niec—and ha sat in church with ’em whenev 
thought well to come,” said mr. waul. “and might have left 
properti so respect, to them that’s never been us to 
or unsteadi in no manner of wai—and not so poor but what thei 
have save everi penni and made more of it. and me—the troubl i’
been at, time and time, to come here and be sisterli—and him 
thing on hi mind all the while that might make anybodi’s flesh creep.
but if the almighti’s allow it, he mean to punish him for it.
brother solomon, i shall be go, if you’ll drive me.”

“i’ve no desir to put my foot on the premis again,” said solomon.
“i’ve got land of my own and properti of my own to will awai.”

“it’s a poor tale how luck goe in the world,” said jonah. “it 
answer to have a bit of spirit in you. you’d better be a dog in 
manger. but those abov ground might learn a lesson. on fool’s will 
enough in a famili.”

“there’s more wai than on of be a fool,” said solomon. “i shan’
leav my monei to be pour down the sink, and i shan’t leav it 
foundl from africai. i like featherston that were brew such,
and not turn featherston with stick the name on ’em.”

solomon address these remark in a loud asid to mr. waul as 
rose to accompani her. brother jonah felt himself capabl of much 
sting wit than thi, but he reflect that there wa no us 
offend the new proprietor of stone court, until you were 
that he wa quit without intent of hospit toward witti 
whose name he wa about to bear.

mr. joshua rigg, in fact, appear to troubl himself littl about 
innuendo, but show a notabl chang of manner, walk coolli up 
mr. standish and put busi question with much cool. he 
a high chirp voic and a vile accent. fred, whom he no longer 
to laughter, thought him the lowest monster he had ever seen. but 
wa feel rather sick. the middlemarch mercer wait for 
opportun of engag mr. rigg in convers: there wa no 
how mani pair of leg the new proprietor might requir hose for, 
profit were more to be reli on than legaci. also, the mercer, as 
second cousin, wa dispassion enough to feel curios.

mr. vinci, after hi on outburst, had remain proudli silent, 
too much preoccupi with unpleas feel to think of move, 
he observ that hi wife had gone to fred’s side and wa 
silent while she held her darl’s hand. he rose immedi, 
turn hi back on the compani while he said to her in 
underton,—“don’t give wai, luci; don’t make a fool of yourself, 
dear, befor these peopl,” he ad in hi usual loud voic—“go 
order the phaeton, fred; i have no time to wast.”

mari garth had befor thi been get readi to go home with 
father. she met fred in the hall, and now for the first time had 
courag to look at him. he had that wither sort of pale 
will sometim come on young face, and hi hand wa veri cold when 
shook it. mari too wa agit; she wa consciou that fatal,
without will of her own, she had perhap made a great differ 
fred’s lot.

“good-by,” she said, with affection sad. “be brave, fred. i 
believ you ar better without the monei. what wa the good of it 
mr. featherston?”

“that’s all veri fine,” said fred, pettishli. “what is a fellow to do?
i must go into the church now.” (he knew that thi would vex mari: 
well; then she must tell him what els he could do.) “and i thought 
should be abl to pai your father at onc and make everyth right.
and you have not even a hundr pound left you. what shall you do now,
mari?”

“take anoth situat, of cours, as soon as i can get on. my 
ha enough to do to keep the rest, without me. good-by.”

in a veri short time stone court wa clear of well-
featherston and other long-accustom visitor. anoth stranger 
been brought to settl in the neighborhood of middlemarch, but in 
case of mr. rigg featherston there wa more discont with 
visibl consequ than specul as to the effect which 
presenc might have in the futur. no soul wa prophet enough to 
ani forebod as to what might appear on the trial of joshua rigg.

and here i am natur led to reflect on the mean of elev a 
subject. histor parallel ar remark effici in thi wai. 
chief object to them is, that the dilig narrat mai lack space,
or (what is often the same thing) mai not be abl to think of them 
ani degre of particular, though he mai have a 
confid that if known thei would be illustr. it seem an 
and shorter wai to digniti, to observ that—sinc there never wa 
true stori which could not be told in parabl, where you might put 
monkei for a margrav, and vice versa—whatev ha been or is to 
narrat by me about low peopl, mai be ennobl by be consid 
parabl; so that if ani bad habit and ugli consequ ar 
into view, the reader mai have the relief of regard them as not 
than figur ungenteel, and mai feel himself virtual in 
with person of some style. thu while i tell the truth about loobi,
my reader’s imagin need not be entir exclud from 
occup with lord; and the petti sum which ani bankrupt of 
stand would be sorri to retir upon, mai be lift to the level 
high commerci transact by the inexpens addit 
proport cipher.

as to ani provinci histori in which the agent ar all of high 
rank, that must be of a date long posterior to the first reform bill,
and peter featherston, you perceiv, wa dead and buri some 
befor lord grei came into offic.




chapter xxxvi.

’t is strang to see the humor of these men,
these great aspir spirit, that should be wise:
. . . . . . . .
for be the natur of great spirit to 
to be where thei mai be most emin;
thei, rate of themselv so farr 
us in conceit, with whom thei do frequent,
imagin how we wonder and 
all that thei do or sai; which make them 
to make our admir more extrem,
which thei suppos thei cannot, ’less thei 
notic of their extrem and highest thought.
—daniel: _tragedi of philota_.


mr. vinci went home from the read of the will with hi point of 
consider chang in relat to mani subject. he wa 
open-mind man, but given to indirect mode of express himself:
when he wa disappoint in a market for hi silk braid, he swore 
the groom; when hi brother-in-law bulstrod had vex him, he 
cut remark on method; and it wa now appar that he 
fred’s idl with a sudden increas of sever, by hi throw 
embroid cap out of the smoke-room on to the hall-floor.

“well, sir,” he observ, when that young gentleman wa move off 
bed, “i hope you’ve made up your mind now to go up next term and 
your examin. i’ve taken my resolut, so i advis you to lose 
time in take your.”

fred made no answer: he wa too utterli depress. twenti-four 
ago he had thought that instead of need to know what he should do,
he should by thi time know that he need to do noth: that 
should hunt in pink, have a first-rate hunter, ride to cover on a 
hack, and be gener respect for do so; moreov, that he 
be abl at onc to pai mr. garth, and that mari could no longer 
ani reason for not marri him. and all thi wa to have come 
studi or other inconveni, pure by the favor of provid in 
shape of an old gentleman’s capric. but now, at the end of 
twenti-four hour, all those firm expect were upset. it 
“rather hard line” that while he wa smart under 
disappoint he should be treat as if he could have help it. 
he went awai silent and hi mother plead for him.

“don’t be hard on the poor boi, vinci. he’ll turn out well yet, 
that wick man ha deceiv him. i feel as sure as i sit here, 
will turn out well—els why wa he brought back from the brink of 
grave? and i call it a robberi: it wa like give him the land, 
promis it; and what is promis, if make everybodi believ is 
promis? and you see he did leav him ten thousand pound, and 
took it awai again.”

“took it awai again!” said mr. vinci, pettishli. “i tell you the lad’
an unlucki lad, luci. and you’ve alwai spoil him.”

“well, vinci, he wa my first, and you made a fine fuss with him 
he came. you were as proud as proud,” said mr. vinci, 
recov her cheer smile.

“who know what babi will turn to? i wa fool enough, i dare sai,”
said the husband—more mildli, howev.

“but who ha handsom, better children than our? fred is far 
other peopl’s son: you mai hear it in hi speech, that he ha 
colleg compani. and rosamond—where is there a girl like her? she 
stand besid ani ladi in the land, and onli look the better for it. 
see—mr. lydgat ha kept the highest compani and been everywher, 
he fell in love with her at onc. not but what i could have 
rosamond had not engag herself. she might have met somebodi on 
visit who would have been a far better match; i mean at 
schoolfellow miss willoughbi’s. there ar relat in that 
quit as high as mr. lydgat’s.”

“damn relat!” said mr. vinci; “i’ve had enough of them. i don’
want a son-in-law who ha got noth but hi relat to 
him.”

“why, my dear,” said mr. vinci, “you seem as pleas as could 
about it. it’s true, i wasn’t at home; but rosamond told me you hadn’
a word to sai against the engag. and she ha begun to bui in 
best linen and cambric for her undercloth.”

“not by my will,” said mr. vinci. “i shall have enough to do thi year,
with an idl scamp of a son, without pai for wed-cloth. 
time ar as tight as can be; everybodi is be ruin; and i don’
believ lydgat ha got a farth. i shan’t give my consent to 
marri. let ’em wait, as their elder have done befor ’em.”

“rosamond will take it hard, vinci, and you know you never could 
to cross her.”

“ye, i could. the sooner the engag’s off, the better. i don’
believ he’ll ever make an incom, the wai he goe on. he 
enemi; that’s all i hear of hi make.”

“but he stand veri high with mr. bulstrod, my dear. the 
would pleas _him_, i should think.”

“pleas the deuc!” said mr. vinci. “bulstrod won’t pai for 
keep. and if lydgat think i’m go to give monei for them to set 
housekeep, he’s mistaken, that’s all. i expect i shall have to 
down my hors soon. you’d better tell rosi what i sai.”

thi wa a not infrequ procedur with mr. vinci—to be rash in 
assent, and on becom subsequ consciou that he had been rash,
to emploi other in make the offens retract. howev, mr.
vinci, who never willingli oppos her husband, lost no time the 
morn in let rosamond know what he had said. rosamond, 
some muslin-work, listen in silenc, and at the end gave a 
turn of her grace neck, of which onli long experi could 
you that it meant perfect obstinaci.

“what do you sai, my dear?” said her mother, with 
defer.

“papa doe not mean anyth of the kind,” said rosamond, quit calmli.
“he ha alwai said that he wish me to marri the man i love. and 
shall marri mr. lydgat. it is seven week now sinc papa gave 
consent. and i hope we shall have mr. bretton’s hous.”

“well, my dear, i shall leav you to manag your papa. you alwai 
manag everybodi. but if we ever do go and get damask, sadler’s is 
place—far better than hopkin’s. mr. bretton’s is veri larg, though:
i should love you to have such a hous; but it will take a great 
of furnitur—carpet and everyth, besid plate and glass. and 
hear, your papa sai he will give no monei. do you think mr. 
expect it?”

“you cannot imagin that i should ask him, mamma. of cours 
understand hi own affair.”

“but he mai have been look for monei, my dear, and we all thought 
your have a pretti legaci as well as fred;—and now everyth is 
dread—there’s no pleasur in think of anyth, with that 
boi disappoint as he is.”

“that ha noth to do with my marriag, mamma. fred must leav 
be idl. i am go up-stair to take thi work to miss morgan: 
doe the open hem veri well. mari garth might do some work for 
now, i should think. her sew is exquisit; it is the nicest thing 
know about mari. i should so like to have all my cambric 
doubl-hem. and it take a long time.”

mr. vinci’s belief that rosamond could manag her papa wa 
found. apart from hi dinner and hi cours, mr. vinci, 
as he wa, had as littl of hi own wai as if he had been a 
minist: the forc of circumst wa easili too much for him, as 
is for most pleasur-love florid men; and the circumst 
rosamond wa particularli forcibl by mean of that mild 
which, as we know, enabl a white soft live substanc to make 
wai in spite of oppos rock. papa wa not a rock: he had no 
fixiti than that fixiti of altern impuls sometim call habit,
and thi wa altogeth unfavor to hi take the onli 
line of conduct in relat to hi daughter’s engag—name, 
inquir thoroughli into lydgat’s circumst, declar hi 
inabl to furnish monei, and forbid alik either a speedi 
or an engag which must be too lengthi. that seem veri simpl 
easi in the statement; but a disagre resolv form in the 
hour of the morn had as mani condit against it as the 
frost, and rare persist under the warm influenc of the dai.
the indirect though emphat express of opinion to which mr. 
wa prone suffer much restraint in thi case: lydgat wa a proud 
toward whom innuendo were obvious unsaf, and throw hi hat 
the floor wa out of the question. mr. vinci wa a littl in aw 
him, a littl vain that he want to marri rosamond, a 
indispos to rais a question of monei in which hi own posit 
not advantag, a littl afraid of be worst in dialogu with 
man better educ and more highli bred than himself, and a 
afraid of do what hi daughter would not like. the part mr. 
prefer plai wa that of the gener host whom nobodi criticis.
in the earlier half of the dai there wa busi to hinder ani 
commun of an advers resolv; in the later there wa dinner,
wine, whist, and gener satisfact. and in the mean while the 
were each leav their littl deposit and gradual form the 
reason for inact, name, that action wa too late. the 
lover spent most of hi even in lowick gate, and a love-make 
at all depend on monei-advanc from father-in-law, or 
incom from a profess, went on flourishingli under mr. vinci’s 
ey. young love-make—that gossam web! even the point it 
to—the thing whenc it subtl interlac ar swung—ar 
percept: momentari touch of fingertip, meet of rai 
blue and dark orb, unfinish phrase, lightest chang of cheek 
lip, faintest tremor. the web itself is made of spontan 
and indefin joi, yearn of on life toward anoth, vision 
complet, indefinit trust. and lydgat fell to spin that 
from hi inward self with wonder rapid, in spite of 
suppos to be finish off with the drama of laur—in spite too 
medicin and biologi; for the inspect of macer muscl or of 
present in a dish (like santa lucia’s), and other incid 
scientif inquiri, ar observ to be less incompat with 
love than a nativ dul or a live addict to the lowest prose.
as for rosamond, she wa in the water-lili’s expand wonder 
it own fuller life, and she too wa spin industri at 
mutual web. all thi went on in the corner of the draw-room 
the piano stood, and subtl as it wa, the light made it a sort 
rainbow visibl to mani observ besid mr. farebroth. 
certainti that miss vinci and mr. lydgat were engag becam 
in middlemarch without the aid of formal announc.

aunt bulstrod wa again stir to anxieti; but thi time 
address herself to her brother, go to the warehous expressli 
avoid mr. vinci’s volatil. hi repli were not satisfactori.

“walter, you never mean to tell me that you have allow all thi to 
on without inquiri into mr. lydgat’s prospect?” said mr. bulstrod,
open her ey with wider graviti at her brother, who wa in 
peevish warehous humor. “think of thi girl brought up in luxuri—
too worldli a wai, i am sorri to sai—what will she do on a 
incom?”

“oh, confound it, harriet! what can i do when men come into the 
without ani ask of mine? did you shut your hous up against lydgat?
bulstrod ha push him forward more than anybodi. i never made 
fuss about the young fellow. you should go and talk to your 
about it, not me.”

“well, realli, walter, how can mr. bulstrod be to blame? i am sure 
did not wish for the engag.”

“oh, if bulstrod had not taken him by the hand, i should never 
invit him.”

“but you call him in to attend on fred, and i am sure that wa 
merci,” said mr. bulstrod, lose her clew in the intricaci of 
subject.

“i don’t know about merci,” said mr. vinci, testili. “i know i 
worri more than i like with my famili. i wa a good brother to you,
harriet, befor you marri bulstrod, and i must sai he doesn’t 
show that friendli spirit toward your famili that might have 
expect of him.” mr. vinci wa veri littl like a jesuit, but 
accomplish jesuit could have turn a question more adroitli. 
had to defend her husband instead of blame her brother, and 
convers end at a point as far from the begin as some 
spar between the brother-in-law at a vestri meet.

mr. bulstrod did not repeat her brother’s complaint to her husband,
but in the even she spoke to him of lydgat and rosamond. he did 
share her warm interest, howev; and onli spoke with resign 
the risk attend on the begin of medic practic and 
desir of prudenc.

“i am sure we ar bound to prai for that thoughtless girl—brought up 
she ha been,” said mr. bulstrod, wish to rous her husband’
feel.

“truli, my dear,” said mr. bulstrod, assentingli. “those who ar 
of thi world can do littl els to arrest the error of 
obstin worldli. that is what we must accustom ourselv 
recogn with regard to your brother’s famili. i could have 
that mr. lydgat had not enter into such a union; but my 
with him ar limit to that us of hi gift for god’s purpos 
is taught us by the divin govern under each dispens.”

mr. bulstrod said no more, attribut some dissatisfact which 
felt to her own want of spiritu. she believ that her husband 
on of those men whose memoir should be written when thei di.

as to lydgat himself, have been accept, he wa prepar to 
all the consequ which he believ himself to forese with 
clear. of cours he must be marri in a year—perhap even in 
a year. thi wa not what he had intend; but other scheme would 
be hinder: thei would simpli adjust themselv anew. marriag, 
cours, must be prepar for in the usual wai. a hous must be 
instead of the room he at present occupi; and lydgat, have 
rosamond speak with admir of old mr. bretton’s hous (situat 
lowick gate), took notic when it fell vacant after the old ladi’
death, and immedi enter into treati for it.

he did thi in an episod wai, veri much as he gave order to 
tailor for everi requisit of perfect dress, without ani notion 
be extravag. on the contrari, he would have despis 
ostent of expens; hi profess had familiar him with 
grade of poverti, and he care much for those who suffer hardship.
he would have behav perfectli at a tabl where the sauc wa 
in a jug with the handl off, and he would have rememb 
about a grand dinner except that a man wa there who talk well. 
it had never occur to him that he should live in ani other than 
he would have call an ordinari wai, with green glass for hock, 
excel wait at tabl. in warm himself at french 
theori he had brought awai no smell of scorch. we mai handl 
extrem opinion with impun while our furnitur, our dinner-give,
and prefer for armori bear in our own case, link 
indissolubl with the establish order. and lydgat’s tendenc wa 
toward extrem opinion: he would have like no barefoot doctrin,
be particular about hi boot: he wa no radic in relat 
anyth but medic reform and the prosecut of discoveri. in 
rest of practic life he walk by hereditari habit; half from 
person pride and unreflect egoism which i have alreadi 
common, and half from that naivet which belong to 
with favorit idea.

ani inward debat lydgat had as to the consequ of thi 
which had stolen upon him, turn on the pauciti of time rather than 
monei. certainli, be in love and be expect continu by 
on who alwai turn out to be prettier than memori could 
her to be, did interfer with the dilig us of spare hour 
might serv some “plod fellow of a german” to make the great,
immin discoveri. thi wa realli an argument for not defer 
marriag too long, as he impli to mr. farebroth, on dai that 
vicar came to hi room with some pond-product which he want 
examin under a better microscop than hi own, and, find lydgat’
tabl of apparatu and specimen in confus, said sarcast—

“ero ha degener; he began by introduc order and harmoni, 
now he bring back chao.”

“ye, at some stage,” said lydgat, lift hi brow and smile,
while he began to arrang hi microscop. “but a better order 
begin after.”

“soon?” said the vicar.

“i hope so, realli. thi unsettl state of affair us up the time,
and when on ha notion in scienc, everi moment is an opportun. 
feel sure that marriag must be the best thing for a man who want 
work steadili. he ha everyth at home then—no teas with 
specul—he can get calm and freedom.”

“you ar an enviabl dog,” said the vicar, “to have such 
prospect—rosamond, calm and freedom, all to your share. here am 
with noth but my pipe and pond-animalcul. now, ar you readi?”

lydgat did not mention to the vicar anoth reason he had for 
to shorten the period of courtship. it wa rather irrit to him,
even with the wine of love in hi vein, to be oblig to mingl 
often with the famili parti at the vinci’, and to enter so much 
middlemarch gossip, protract good cheer, whist-plai, and 
futil. he had to be deferenti when mr. vinci decid 
with trenchant ignor, especi as to those liquor which were 
best inward pickl, preserv you from the effect of bad air. mr.
vinci’s open and simplic were quit unstreak with suspicion 
to the subtl offenc she might give to the tast of her 
son-in-law; and altogeth lydgat had to confess to himself that 
wa descend a littl in relat to rosamond’s famili. but 
exquisit creatur herself suffer in the same sort of wai:—it wa 
least on delight thought that in marri her, he could give her 
much-need transplant.

“dear!” he said to her on even, in hi gentlest tone, as he 
down by her and look close at her face—

but i must first sai that he had found her alon in the draw-room,
where the great old-fashion window, almost as larg as the side 
the room, wa open to the summer scent of the garden at the back 
the hous. her father and mother were gone to a parti, and the 
were all out with the butterfli.

“dear! your eyelid ar red.”

“ar thei?” said rosamond. “i wonder why.” it wa not in her natur 
pour forth wish or grievanc. thei onli came forth gracefulli 
solicit.

“as if you could hide it from me!” said lydgat, lai hi 
tenderli on both of her. “don’t i see a tini drop on on of 
lash? thing troubl you, and you don’t tell me. that is unlov.”

“why should i tell you what you cannot alter? thei ar everi-
thing:—perhap thei have been a littl wors late.”

“famili annoy. don’t fear speak. i guess them.”

“papa ha been more irrit late. fred make him angri, and 
morn there wa a fresh quarrel becaus fred threaten to throw 
whole educ awai, and do someth quit beneath him. and besid—”

rosamond hesit, and her cheek were gather a slight flush.
lydgat had never seen her in troubl sinc the morn of 
engag, and he had never felt so passion toward her as 
thi moment. he kiss the hesit lip gentli, as if to 
them.

“i feel that papa is not quit pleas about our engag,” 
continu, almost in a whisper; “and he said last night that he 
certainli speak to you and sai it must be given up.”

“will you give it up?” said lydgat, with quick energi—almost angrili.

“i never give up anyth that i choos to do,” said rosamond,
recov her calm at the touch of thi chord.

“god bless you!” said lydgat, kiss her again. thi constanc 
purpos in the right place wa ador. he went on:—

“it is too late now for your father to sai that our engag must 
given up. you ar of ag, and i claim you as mine. if anyth is 
to make you unhappi,—that is a reason for hasten our marriag.”

an unmistak delight shone forth from the blue ey that met hi,
and the radianc seem to light up all hi futur with mild sunshin.
ideal happi (of the kind known in the arabian night, in which 
ar invit to step from the labor and discord of the street into 
paradis where everyth is given to you and noth claim) 
to be an affair of a few week’ wait, more or less.

“why should we defer it?” he said, with ardent insist. “i 
taken the hous now: everyth els can soon be got readi—can it not?
you will not mind about new cloth. those can be bought afterward.”

“what origin notion you clever men have!” said rosamond, 
with more thorough laughter than usual at thi humor incongru.
“thi is the first time i ever heard of wed-cloth be 
after marriag.”

“but you don’t mean to sai you would insist on my wait month 
the sake of cloth?” said lydgat, half think that rosamond 
torment him prettili, and half fear that she realli shrank 
speedi marriag. “rememb, we ar look forward to a better sort 
happi even than thi—be continu togeth, independ 
other, and order our live as we will. come, dear, tell me how 
you can be altogeth mine.”

there wa a seriou plead in lydgat’s tone, as if he felt that 
would be injur him by ani fantast delai. rosamond becam 
too, and slightli medit; in fact, she wa go through 
intricaci of lace-edg and hosieri and petticoat-tuck, in 
to give an answer that would at least be approxim.

“six week would be ampl—sai so, rosamond,” insist lydgat,
releas her hand to put hi arm gentli round her.

on littl hand immedi went to pat her hair, while she gave 
neck a medit turn, and then said serious—

“there would be the hous-linen and the furnitur to be prepar.
still, mamma could see to those while we were awai.”

“ye, to be sure. we must be awai a week or so.”

“oh, more than that!” said rosamond, earnestli. she wa think of 
even dress for the visit to sir godwin lydgat’s, which she 
long been secretli hope for as a delight employ of at 
on quarter of the honeymoon, even if she defer her introduct 
the uncl who wa a doctor of divin (also a pleas though 
kind of rank, when sustain by blood). she look at her lover 
some wonder remonstr as she spoke, and he readili 
that she might wish to lengthen the sweet time of doubl solitud.

“whatev you wish, my darl, when the dai is fix. but let us 
a decid cours, and put an end to ani discomfort you mai 
suffer. six week!—i am sure thei would be ampl.”

“i could certainli hasten the work,” said rosamond. “will you, then,
mention it to papa?—i think it would be better to write to him.” 
blush and look at him as the garden flower look at us when we 
forth happili among them in the transcend even light: is 
not a soul beyond utter, half nymph, half child, in those 
petal which glow and breath about the centr of deep color?

he touch her ear and a littl bit of neck under it with hi lip, 
thei sat quit still for mani minut which flow by them like a 
gurgl brook with the kiss of the sun upon it. rosamond 
that no on could be more in love than she wa; and lydgat 
that after all hi wild mistak and absurd credul, he had 
perfect womanhood—felt as if alreadi breath upon by exquisit 
affect such as would be bestow by an accomplish creatur 
vener hi high muse and moment labor and would 
interfer with them; who would creat order in the home and 
with still magic, yet keep her finger readi to touch the lute 
transform life into romanc at ani moment; who wa instruct to 
true womanli limit and not a hair’s-breadth beyond—docil, therefor,
and readi to carri out behest which came from that limit. it 
plainer now than ever that hi notion of remain much longer 
bachelor had been a mistak: marriag would not be an obstruct but 
further. and happen the next dai to accompani a patient 
brass, he saw a dinner-servic there which struck him as so 
the right thing that he bought it at onc. it save time to do 
thing just when you thought of them, and lydgat hate ugli crockeri.
the dinner-servic in question wa expens, but that might be in 
natur of dinner-servic. furnish wa necessarili expens; 
then it had to be done onli onc.

“it must be love,” said mr. vinci, when lydgat mention 
purchas with some descript touch. “just what rosi ought to have.
i trust in heaven it won’t be broken!”

“on must hire servant who will not break thing,” said lydgat.
(certainli, thi wa reason with an imperfect vision of sequenc.
but at that period there wa no sort of reason which wa not more 
less sanction by men of scienc.)

of cours it wa unnecessari to defer the mention of anyth to mamma,
who did not readili take view that were not cheer, and be 
happi wife herself, had hardli ani feel but pride in her daughter’
marriag. but rosamond had good reason for suggest to lydgat 
papa should be appeal to in write. she prepar for the arriv 
the letter by walk with her papa to the warehous the next morn,
and tell him on the wai that mr. lydgat wish to be marri soon.

“nonsens, my dear!” said mr. vinci. “what ha he got to marri on?
you’d much better give up the engag. i’ve told you so 
plainli befor thi. what have you had such an educ for, if 
ar to go and marri a poor man? it’s a cruel thing for a father 
see.”

“mr. lydgat is not poor, papa. he bought mr. peacock’s practic,
which, thei sai, is worth eight or nine hundr a-year.”

“stuff and nonsens! what’s bui a practic? he might as well 
next year’s swallow. it’ll all slip through hi finger.”

“on the contrari, papa, he will increas the practic. see how he 
been call in by the chettam and casaubon.”

“i hope he know i shan’t give anyth—with thi disappoint 
fred, and parliament go to be dissolv, and machin-
everywher, and an elect come on—”

“dear papa! what can that have to do with my marriag?”

“a pretti deal to do with it! we mai all be ruin for what i know—
countri’s in that state! some sai it’s the end of the world, and 
hang if i don’t think it look like it! anyhow, it’s not a time 
me to be draw monei out of my busi, and i should wish lydgat 
know that.”

“i am sure he expect noth, papa. and he ha such veri 
connect: he is sure to rise in on wai or anoth. he is engag 
make scientif discoveri.”

mr. vinci wa silent.

“i cannot give up my onli prospect of happi, papa. mr. lydgat is 
gentleman. i could never love ani on who wa not a perfect gentleman.
you would not like me to go into a consumpt, as arabella hawlei did.
and you know that i never chang my mind.”

again papa wa silent.

“promis me, papa, that you will consent to what we wish. we 
never give each other up; and you know that you have alwai object 
long courtship and late marriag.”

there wa a littl more urgenc of thi kind, till mr. vinci said,
“well, well, child, he must write to me first befor i can 
him,”—and rosamond wa certain that she had gain her point.

mr. vinci’s answer consist chiefli in a demand that lydgat 
insur hi life—a demand immedi conced. thi wa a 
reassur idea suppos that lydgat di, but in the mean time not 
self-support idea. howev, it seem to make everyth 
about rosamond’s marriag; and the necessari purchas went on 
much spirit. not without prudenti consider, howev. a 
(who is go to visit at a baronet’s) must have a few first-
pocket-handkerchief; but beyond the absolut necessari half-dozen,
rosamond content herself without the veri highest style of 
and valencienn. lydgat also, find that hi sum of eight 
pound had been consider reduc sinc he had come to middlemarch,
restrain hi inclin for some plate of an old pattern which 
shown to him when he went into kibbl’s establish at brass 
bui fork and spoon. he wa too proud to act as if he presuppos 
mr. vinci would advanc monei to provid furnitur; and though, 
it would not be necessari to pai for everyth at onc, some 
would be left stand over, he did not wast time in conjectur 
much hi father-in-law would give in the form of dowri, to make 
easi. he wa not go to do anyth extravag, but the 
thing must be bought, and it would be bad economi to bui them of 
poor qualiti. all these matter were by the bye. lydgat foresaw 
scienc and hi profess were the object he should alon 
enthusiast; but he could not imagin himself pursu them 
such a home as wrench had—the door all open, the oil-cloth worn, 
children in soil pinafor, and lunch linger in the form of bone,
black-handl knive, and willow-pattern. but wrench had a 
lymphat wife who made a mummi of herself indoor in a larg shawl;
and he must have altogeth begun with an ill-chosen 
apparatu.

rosamond, howev, wa on her side much occupi with conjectur,
though her quick imit percept warn her against betrai 
too crude.

“i shall like so much to know your famili,” she said on dai, when 
wed journei wa be discuss. “we might perhap take a 
that would allow us to see them as we return. which of your uncl 
you like best?”

“oh,—my uncl godwin, i think. he is a good-natur old fellow.”

“you were constantli at hi hous at quallingham, when you were a boi,
were you not? i should so like to see the old spot and everyth 
were us to. doe he know you ar go to be marri?”

“no,” said lydgat, carelessli, turn in hi chair and rub 
hair up.

“do send him word of it, you naughti unduti nephew. he will 
ask you to take me to quallingham; and then you could show me about 
ground, and i could imagin you there when you were a boi. rememb,
you see me in my home, just as it ha been sinc i wa a child. it 
not fair that i should be so ignor of your. but perhap you 
be a littl asham of me. i forgot that.”

lydgat smile at her tenderli, and realli accept the suggest 
the proud pleasur of show so charm a bride wa worth 
troubl. and now he came to think of it, he would like to see the 
spot with rosamond.

“i will write to him, then. but my cousin ar bore.”

it seem magnific to rosamond to be abl to speak so slightingli 
a baronet’s famili, and she felt much content in the prospect 
be abl to estim them contemptu on her own account.

but mamma wa near spoil all, a dai or two later, by sai—

“i hope your uncl sir godwin will not look down on rosi, mr. lydgat.
i should think he would do someth handsom. a thousand or two can 
noth to a baronet.”

“mamma!” said rosamond, blush deepli; and lydgat piti her so 
that he remain silent and went to the other end of the room 
examin a print curious, as if he had been absent-mind. mamma had 
littl filial lectur afterward, and wa docil as usual. but 
reflect that if ani of those high-bred cousin who were bore, 
be induc to visit middlemarch, thei would see mani thing in her 
famili which might shock them. henc it seem desir that 
should by-and-by get some first-rate posit elsewher than 
middlemarch; and thi could hardli be difficult in the case of a 
who had a titl uncl and could make discoveri. lydgat, 
perceiv, had talk fervidli to rosamond of hi hope as to 
highest us of hi life, and had found it delight to be listen 
by a creatur who would bring him the sweet further of 
affect—beauti—repos—such help as our thought get from the 
sky and the flower-fring meadow.

lydgat reli much on the psycholog differ between what 
the sake of varieti i will call goos and gander: especi on 
innat submiss of the goos as beautifulli correspond to 
strength of the gander.




chapter xxxvii.

thrice happi she that is so well 
unto herself and settl so in 
that neither will for better be 
ne fear to wors with ani chanc to start,
but like a steddi ship doth strongli 
the rage wave and keep her cours aright;
ne aught for tempest doth from it depart,
ne aught for fairer weather’s fals delight.
such self-assur need not fear the 
of grudg foe; ne favour seek of friend;
but in the stai of her own stedfast 
neither to on herself nor other bend.
    most happi she that most assur doth rest,
    but he most happi who such on love best.
—spenser.


the doubt hint by mr. vinci whether it were onli the gener 
or the end of the world that wa come on, now that georg the 
wa dead, parliament dissolv, wellington and peel 
depreci and the new king apologet, wa a feebl type of 
uncertainti in provinci opinion at that time. with the glow-
light of countri place, how could men see which were their 
thought in the confus of a tori ministri pass liber measur,
of tori nobl and elector be anxiou to return liber 
than friend of the recreant minist, and of outcri for 
which seem to have a mysteri remot bear on privat interest,
and were made suspici by the advocaci of disagre neighbor?
buyer of the middlemarch newspap found themselv in an 
posit: dure the agit on the cathol question mani had 
up the “pioneer”—which had a motto from charl jame fox and wa 
the van of progress—becaus it had taken peel’s side about the papist,
and had thu blot it liber with a toler of jesuitri 
baal; but thei were ill-satisfi with the “trumpet,” which—sinc 
blast against rome, and in the gener flaccid of the public 
(nobodi know who would support whom)—had becom feebl in 
blow.

it wa a time, accord to a notic articl in the “pioneer,” 
the cry need of the countri might well counteract a reluct 
public action on the part of men whose mind had from long 
acquir breadth as well as concentr, decis of judgment as 
as toler, dispassion as well as energi—in fact, all 
qualiti which in the melancholi experi of mankind have been 
least dispos to share lodg.

mr. hackbutt, whose fluent speech wa at that time float more 
than usual, and leav much uncertainti as to it ultim channel,
wa heard to sai in mr. hawlei’s offic that the articl in 
“eman” from brook of tipton, and that brook had secretli 
the “pioneer” some month ago.

“that mean mischief, eh?” said mr. hawlei. “he’s got the freak 
be a popular man now, after dangl about like a strai tortois. 
much the wors for him. i’ve had my ey on him for some time. he 
be prettili pump upon. he’s a damn bad landlord. what busi 
an old counti man to come curri favor with a low set of dark-
freemen? as to hi paper, i onli hope he mai do the write himself. 
would be worth our pai for.”

“i understand he ha got a veri brilliant young fellow to edit it, 
can write the highest style of lead articl, quit equal to 
in the london paper. and he mean to take veri high ground on reform.”

“let brook reform hi rent-roll. he’s a curs old screw, and 
build all over hi estat ar go to rack. i suppos thi 
fellow is some loos fish from london.”

“hi name is ladislaw. he is said to be of foreign extract.”

“i know the sort,” said mr. hawlei; “some emissari. he’ll begin 
flourish about the right of man and end with murder a wench.
that’s the style.”

“you must conced that there ar abus, hawlei,” said mr. hackbutt,
forese some polit disagr with hi famili lawyer. “
myself should never favor immoder view—in fact i take my stand 
huskisson—but i cannot blind myself to the consider that 
non-represent of larg town—”

“larg town be damn!” said mr. hawlei, impati of exposit. “
know a littl too much about middlemarch elect. let ’em quash 
pocket borough to-morrow, and bring in everi mushroom town in 
kingdom—thei’ll onli increas the expens of get into parliament. 
go upon fact.”

mr. hawlei’s disgust at the notion of the “pioneer” be edit by 
emissari, and of brook becom activ polit—as if a tortois 
desultori pursuit should protrud it small head ambiti 
becom rampant—wa hardli equal to the annoy felt by some 
of mr. brook’s own famili. the result had ooz forth gradual, 
the discoveri that your neighbor ha set up an unpleas kind 
manufactur which will be perman under your nostril without 
remedi. the “pioneer” had been secretli bought even befor 
ladislaw’s arriv, the expect opportun have offer itself 
the readi of the proprietor to part with a valuabl properti 
did not pai; and in the interv sinc mr. brook had written 
invit, those germin idea of make hi mind tell upon the 
at larg which had been present in him from hi younger year, but 
hitherto lain in some obstruct, had been sprout under cover.

the develop wa much further by a delight in hi guest 
prove greater even than he had anticip. for it seem that 
wa not onli at home in all those artist and literari subject 
mr. brook had gone into at on time, but that he wa strikingli 
at seiz the point of the polit situat, and deal with 
in that larg spirit which, aid by adequ memori, lend itself 
quotat and gener effect of treatment.

“he seem to me a kind of shellei, you know,” mr. brook took 
opportun of sai, for the gratif of mr. casaubon. “i don’
mean as to anyth objection—laxiti or atheism, or anyth 
that kind, you know—ladislaw’s sentiment in everi wai i am sure 
good—inde, we were talk a great deal togeth last night. but 
ha the same sort of enthusiasm for liberti, freedom, emancip—
fine thing under guidanc—under guidanc, you know. i think i shall 
abl to put him on the right tack; and i am the more pleas becaus 
is a relat of your, casaubon.”

if the right tack impli anyth more precis than the rest of mr.
brook’s speech, mr. casaubon silent hope that it refer to 
occup at a great distanc from lowick. he had dislik will 
he help him, but he had begun to dislik him still more now that 
had declin hi help. that is the wai with us when we have ani 
jealousi in our disposit: if our talent ar chiefli of 
burrow kind, our honei-sip cousin (whom we have grave 
for object to) is like to have a secret contempt for us, and 
on who admir him pass an obliqu critic on ourselv. 
the scrupl of rectitud in our soul, we ar abov the mean 
injur him—rather we meet all hi claim on us by activ benefit;
and the draw of chequ for him, be a superior which he 
recogn, give our bitter a milder infus. now mr. casaubon 
been depriv of that superior (as anyth more than a remembr)
in a sudden, caprici manner. hi antipathi to will did not 
from the common jealousi of a winter-worn husband: it wa 
deeper, bred by hi lifelong claim and discont; but dorothea, 
that she wa present—dorothea, as a young wife who herself had shown 
offens capabl of critic, necessarili gave concentr 
the uneasi which had befor been vagu.

will ladislaw on hi side felt that hi dislik wa flourish at 
expens of hi gratitud, and spent much inward discours in 
the dislik. casaubon hate him—he knew that veri well; on hi 
entranc he could discern a bitter in the mouth and a venom in 
glanc which would almost justifi declar war in spite of 
benefit. he wa much oblig to casaubon in the past, but realli 
act of marri thi wife wa a set-off against the oblig. it 
a question whether gratitud which refer to what is done for on’
self ought not to give wai to indign at what is done 
anoth. and casaubon had done a wrong to dorothea in marri her. 
man wa bound to know himself better than that, and if he chose to 
grai crunch bone in a cavern, he had no busi to be lure 
girl into hi companionship. “it is the most horribl 
virgin-sacrific,” said will; and he paint to himself what 
dorothea’s inward sorrow as if he had been write a choric wail. 
he would never lose sight of her: he would watch over her—if he gave 
everyth els in life he would watch over her, and she should 
that she had on slave in the world. will had—to us sir 
brown’s phrase—a “passion prodig” of statement both to 
and other. the simpl truth wa that noth then invit him 
strongli as the presenc of dorothea.

invit of the formal kind had been want, howev, for will 
never been ask to go to lowick. mr. brook, inde, confid 
do everyth agreeabl which casaubon, poor fellow, wa too 
absorb to think of, had arrang to bring ladislaw to lowick 
time (not neglect meanwhil to introduc him elsewher on 
opportun as “a young rel of casaubon’s”). and though will 
not seen dorothea alon, their interview had been enough to 
her former sens of young companionship with on who wa clever 
herself, yet seem readi to be swai by her. poor dorothea befor 
marriag had never found much room in other mind for what she 
most to sai; and she had not, as we know, enjoi her husband’
superior instruct so much as she had expect. if she spoke with 
keen of interest to mr. casaubon, he heard her with an air 
patienc as if she had given a quotat from the delectu familiar 
him from hi tender year, and sometim mention curtli what 
sect or personag had held similar idea, as if there were too 
of that sort in stock alreadi; at other time he would inform her 
she wa mistaken, and reassert what her remark had question.

but will ladislaw alwai seem to see more in what she said than 
herself saw. dorothea had littl vaniti, but she had the ardent woman’
need to rule benefic by make the joi of anoth soul. henc 
mere chanc of see will occasion wa like a lunett open 
the wall of her prison, give her a glimps of the sunni air; and 
pleasur began to nullifi her origin alarm at what her husband 
think about the introduct of will as her uncl’s guest. on 
subject mr. casaubon had remain dumb.

but will want to talk with dorothea alon, and wa impati of 
circumst. howev slight the terrestri intercours between 
and beatric or petrarch and laura, time chang the proport 
thing, and in later dai it is prefer to have fewer sonnet 
more convers. necess excus stratagem, but stratagem 
limit by the dread of offend dorothea. he found out at last 
he want to take a particular sketch at lowick; and on morn 
mr. brook had to drive along the lowick road on hi wai to the 
town, will ask to be set down with hi sketch-book and camp-stool 
lowick, and without announc himself at the manor settl himself 
sketch in a posit where he must see dorothea if she came out 
walk—and he knew that she usual walk an hour in the morn.

but the stratagem wa defeat by the weather. cloud gather 
treacher quick, the rain came down, and will wa oblig to 
shelter in the hous. he intend, on the strength of relationship, 
go into the draw-room and wait there without be announc; 
see hi old acquaint the butler in the hall, he said, “don’
mention that i am here, pratt; i will wait till luncheon; i know mr.
casaubon doe not like to be disturb when he is in the librari.”

“master is out, sir; there’s onli mr. casaubon in the librari. i’
better tell her you’re here, sir,” said pratt, a red-cheek man 
to live convers with tantripp, and often agre with her that 
must be dull for madam.

“oh, veri well; thi confound rain ha hinder me from sketch,”
said will, feel so happi that he affect indiffer 
delight eas.

in anoth minut he wa in the librari, and dorothea wa meet 
with her sweet unconstrain smile.

“mr. casaubon ha gone to the archdeacon’s,” she said, at onc. “
don’t know whether he will be at home again long befor dinner. he 
uncertain how long he should be. did you want to sai 
particular to him?”

“no; i came to sketch, but the rain drove me in. els i would not 
disturb you yet. i suppos that mr. casaubon wa here, and i know 
dislik interrupt at thi hour.”

“i am indebt to the rain, then. i am so glad to see you.” 
utter these common word with the simpl sincer of an 
child, visit at school.

“i realli came for the chanc of see you alon,” said will,
mysteri forc to be just as simpl as she wa. he could not 
to ask himself, why not? “i want to talk about thing, as we did 
rome. it alwai make a differ when other peopl ar present.”

“ye,” said dorothea, in her clear full tone of assent. “sit down.” 
seat herself on a dark ottoman with the brown book behind her,
look in her plain dress of some thin woollen-white materi, 
a singl ornament on her besid her wed-ring, as if she were 
a vow to be differ from all other women; and will sat down 
her at two yard’ distanc, the light fall on hi bright curl 
delic but rather petul profil, with it defiant curv of 
and chin. each look at the other as if thei had been two 
which had open then and there. dorothea for the moment forgot 
husband’s mysteri irrit against will: it seem fresh water 
her thirsti lip to speak without fear to the on person whom she 
found recept; for in look backward through sad 
exagger a past solac.

“i have often thought that i should like to talk to you again,” 
said, immedi. “it seem strang to me how mani thing i said 
you.”

“i rememb them all,” said will, with the unspeak content in 
soul of feel that he wa in the presenc of a creatur worthi to 
perfectli love. i think hi own feel at that moment were perfect,
for we mortal have our divin moment, when love is satisfi in 
complet of the belov object.

“i have tri to learn a great deal sinc we were in rome,” 
dorothea. “i can read latin a littl, and i am begin to 
just a littl greek. i can help mr. casaubon better now. i can find 
refer for him and save hi ey in mani wai. but it is 
difficult to be learn; it seem as if peopl were worn out on the 
to great thought, and can never enjoi them becaus thei ar 
tire.”

“if a man ha a capac for great thought, he is like to 
them befor he is decrepit,” said will, with irrepress quick.
but through certain sensibl dorothea wa as quick as he, 
see her face chang, he ad, immedi, “but it is quit 
that the best mind have been sometim overstrain in work 
their idea.”

“you correct me,” said dorothea. “i express myself ill. i should 
said that those who have great thought get too much worn in 
them out. i us to feel about that, even when i wa a littl girl; 
it alwai seem to me that the us i should like to make of my 
would be to help some on who did great work, so that hi 
might be lighter.”

dorothea wa led on to thi bit of autobiographi without ani sens 
make a revel. but she had never befor said anyth to 
which threw so strong a light on her marriag. he did not shrug 
shoulder; and for want of that muscular outlet he thought the 
irrit of beauti lip kiss holi skull and other 
ecclesiast enshrin. also he had to take care that hi 
should not betrai that thought.

“but you mai easili carri the help too far,” he said, “and 
over-wrought yourself. ar you not too much shut up? you alreadi 
paler. it would be better for mr. casaubon to have a secretari; 
could easili get a man who would do half hi work for him. it 
save him more effectu, and you need onli help him in lighter wai.”

“how can you think of that?” said dorothea, in a tone of 
remonstr. “i should have no happi if i did not help him in 
work. what could i do? there is no good to be done in lowick. the 
thing i desir is to help him more. and he object to a secretari:
pleas not to mention that again.”

“certainli not, now i know your feel. but i have heard both mr.
brook and sir jame chettam express the same wish.”

“ye,” said dorothea, “but thei don’t understand—thei want me to be 
great deal on horseback, and have the garden alter and 
conservatori, to fill up my dai. i thought you could understand 
on’s mind ha other want,” she ad, rather impati—“besid,
mr. casaubon cannot bear to hear of a secretari.”

“my mistak is excus,” said will. “in old dai i us to hear mr.
casaubon speak as if he look forward to have a secretari. inde 
held out the prospect of that offic to me. but i turn out to be—
good enough for it.”

dorothea wa try to extract out of thi an excus for her husband’
evid repuls, as she said, with a play smile, “you were not 
steadi worker enough.”

“no,” said will, shake hi head backward somewhat after the manner 
a spirit hors. and then, the old irrit demon prompt him 
give anoth good pinch at the moth-wing of poor mr. casaubon’s glori,
he went on, “and i have seen sinc that mr. casaubon doe not like 
on to overlook hi work and know thoroughli what he is do. he 
too doubt—too uncertain of himself. i mai not be good for much, 
he dislik me becaus i disagre with him.”

will wa not without hi intent to be alwai gener, but 
tongu ar littl trigger which have usual been pull 
gener intent can be brought to bear. and it wa too 
that casaubon’s dislik of him should not be fairli account for 
dorothea. yet when he had spoken he wa rather uneasi as to the 
on her.

but dorothea wa strang quiet—not immedi indign, as she 
been on a like occas in rome. and the caus lai deep. she wa 
longer struggl against the percept of fact, but 
herself to their clearest percept; and now when she look 
at her husband’s failur, still more at hi possibl conscious 
failur, she seem to be look along the on track where duti 
tender. will’s want of retic might have been met with 
sever, if he had not alreadi been recommend to her merci by 
husband’s dislik, which must seem hard to her till she saw 
reason for it.

she did not answer at onc, but after look down ruminatingli 
said, with some earnest, “mr. casaubon must have overcom 
dislik of you so far as hi action were concern: and that 
admir.”

“ye; he ha shown a sens of justic in famili matter. it wa 
abomin thing that my grandmoth should have been 
becaus she made what thei call a _mesalli_, though there 
noth to be said against her husband except that he wa a 
refuge who gave lesson for hi bread.”

“i wish i knew all about her!” said dorothea. “i wonder how she 
the chang from wealth to poverti: i wonder whether she wa happi 
her husband! do you know much about them?”

“no; onli that my grandfath wa a patriot—a bright fellow—could 
mani languag—music—got hi bread by teach all sort of thing.
thei both di rather earli. and i never knew much of my father, 
what my mother told me; but he inherit the music talent. 
rememb hi slow walk and hi long thin hand; and on dai 
with me when he wa ly ill, and i wa veri hungri, and had onli 
littl bit of bread.”

“ah, what a differ life from mine!” said dorothea, with 
interest, clasp her hand on her lap. “i have alwai had too much 
everyth. but tell me how it wa—mr. casaubon could not have 
about you then.”

“no; but my father had made himself known to mr. casaubon, and that 
my last hungri dai. my father di soon after, and my mother and i 
well taken care of. mr. casaubon alwai expressli recogn it as 
duti to take care of us becaus of the harsh injustic which had 
shown to hi mother’s sister. but now i am tell you what is not 
to you.”

in hi inmost soul will wa consciou of wish to tell dorothea 
wa rather new even in hi own construct of thing—name, that mr.
casaubon had never done more than pai a debt toward him. will wa 
too good a fellow to be easi under the sens of be ungrat. 
when gratitud ha becom a matter of reason there ar mani wai 
escap from it bond.

“no,” answer dorothea; “mr. casaubon ha alwai avoid dwell 
hi own honor action.” she did not feel that her husband’s 
wa depreci; but thi notion of what justic had requir in 
relat with will ladislaw took strong hold on her mind. after 
moment’s paus, she ad, “he had never told me that he support 
mother. is she still live?”

“no; she di by an accid—a fall—four year ago. it is curiou 
my mother, too, ran awai from her famili, but not for the sake of 
husband. she never would tell me anyth about her famili, except 
she forsook them to get her own live—went on the stage, in fact. 
wa a dark-ei creatur, with crisp ringlet, and never seem to 
get old. you see i come of rebelli blood on both side,” 
end, smile brightli at dorothea, while she wa still look 
seriou intent befor her, like a child see a drama for 
first time.

but her face, too, broke into a smile as she said, “that is 
apolog, i suppos, for have yourself been rather rebelli; i mean,
to mr. casaubon’s wish. you must rememb that you have not done 
he thought best for you. and if he dislik you—you were speak 
dislik a littl while ago—but i should rather sai, if he ha shown 
pain feel toward you, you must consid how sensit he 
becom from the wear effect of studi. perhap,” she continu,
get into a plead tone, “my uncl ha not told you how 
mr. casaubon’s ill wa. it would be veri petti of us who ar 
and can bear thing, to think much of small offenc from those 
carri a weight of trial.”

“you teach me better,” said will. “i will never grumbl on that 
again.” there wa a gentl in hi tone which came from 
unutter content of perceiv—what dorothea wa 
consciou of—that she wa travel into the remot of pure 
and loyalti toward her husband. will wa readi to ador her piti 
loyalti, if she would associ himself with her in manifest them.
“i have realli sometim been a pervers fellow,” he went on, “but 
will never again, if i can help it, do or sai what you 
disapprov.”

“that is veri good of you,” said dorothea, with anoth open smile. “
shall have a littl kingdom then, where i shall give law. but you 
soon go awai, out of my rule, i imagin. you will soon be tire 
stai at the grang.”

“that is a point i want to mention to you—on of the reason why 
wish to speak to you alon. mr. brook propos that i should stai 
thi neighborhood. he ha bought on of the middlemarch newspap, 
he wish me to conduct that, and also to help him in other wai.”

“would not that be a sacrific of higher prospect for you?” 
dorothea.

“perhap; but i have alwai been blame for think of prospect, 
not settl to anyth. and here is someth offer to me. if 
would not like me to accept it, i will give it up. otherwis i 
rather stai in thi part of the countri than go awai. i belong 
nobodi anywher els.”

“i should like you to stai veri much,” said dorothea, at onc, 
simpli and readili as she had spoken at rome. there wa not the 
of a reason in her mind at the moment why she should not sai so.

“then i _will_ stai,” said ladislaw, shake hi head backward, 
and go toward the window, as if to see whether the rain had ceas.

but the next moment, dorothea, accord to a habit which wa 
continu stronger, began to reflect that her husband 
differ from herself, and she color deepli under the 
embarrass of have express what might be in opposit to 
husband’s feel, and of have to suggest thi opposit to will.
hi face wa not turn toward her, and thi made it easier to sai—

“but my opinion is of littl consequ on such a subject. i think 
should be guid by mr. casaubon. i spoke without think of 
els than my own feel, which ha noth to do with the 
question. but it now occur to me—perhap mr. casaubon might see 
the propos wa not wise. can you not wait now and mention it to him?”

“i can’t wait to-dai,” said will, inwardli sear by the 
that mr. casaubon would enter. “the rain is quit over now. i told mr.
brook not to call for me: i would rather walk the five mile. i 
strike across halsel common, and see the gleam on the wet grass. 
like that.”

he approach her to shake hand quit hurriedli, long but 
dare to sai, “don’t mention the subject to mr. casaubon.” no, 
dare not, could not sai it. to ask her to be less simpl and 
would be like breath on the crystal that you want to see the 
through. and there wa alwai the other great dread—of himself 
dim and forev rai-shorn in her ey.

“i wish you could have stai,” said dorothea, with a touch 
mourn, as she rose and put out her hand. she also had 
thought which she did not like to express:—will certainli ought to 
no time in consult mr. casaubon’s wish, but for her to urg 
might seem an undu dictat.

so thei onli said “good-by,” and will quit the hous, 
across the field so as not to run ani risk of encount mr.
casaubon’s carriag, which, howev, did not appear at the gate 
four o’clock. that wa an unpropiti hour for come home: it wa 
earli to gain the moral support under ennui of dress hi person 
dinner, and too late to undress hi mind of the dai’s 
ceremoni and affair, so as to be prepar for a good plung into 
seriou busi of studi. on such occas he usual threw into 
easi-chair in the librari, and allow dorothea to read the 
paper to him, close hi ey the while. to-dai, howev, he 
that relief, observ that he had alreadi had too mani public 
urg upon him; but he spoke more cheerfulli than usual, when 
ask about hi fatigu, and ad with that air of formal effort 
never forsook him even when he spoke without hi waistcoat and cravat—

“i have had the gratif of meet my former acquaint, dr.
span, to-dai, and of be prais by on who is himself a 
recipi of prais. he spoke veri handsom of my late tractat 
the egyptian mysteri,—us, in fact, term which it would not 
me to repeat.” in utter the last claus, mr. casaubon lean 
the elbow of hi chair, and swai hi head up and down, appar 
a muscular outlet instead of that recapitul which would not 
been becom.

“i am veri glad you have had that pleasur,” said dorothea, 
to see her husband less weari than usual at thi hour. “befor you 
i had been regret that you happen to be out to-dai.”

“why so, my dear?” said mr. casaubon, throw himself backward again.

“becaus mr. ladislaw ha been here; and he ha mention a propos 
my uncl’s which i should like to know your opinion of.” her 
she felt wa realli concern in thi question. even with her 
of the world she had a vagu impress that the posit offer 
will wa out of keep with hi famili connect, and certainli mr.
casaubon had a claim to be consult. he did not speak, but 
bow.

“dear uncl, you know, ha mani project. it appear that he ha 
on of the middlemarch newspap, and he ha ask mr. ladislaw 
stai in thi neighborhood and conduct the paper for him, 
help him in other wai.”

dorothea look at her husband while she spoke, but he had at 
blink and final close hi ey, as if to save them; while hi 
becam more tens. “what is your opinion?” she ad, rather timidli,
after a slight paus.

“did mr. ladislaw come on purpos to ask my opinion?” said mr.
casaubon, open hi ey narrowli with a knife-edg look 
dorothea. she wa realli uncomfort on the point he inquir about,
but she onli becam a littl more seriou, and her ey did not swerv.

“no,” she answer immedi, “he did not sai that he came to 
your opinion. but when he mention the propos, he of cours 
me to tell you of it.”

mr. casaubon wa silent.

“i fear that you might feel some object. but certainli a young 
with so much talent might be veri us to my uncl—might help him 
do good in a better wai. and mr. ladislaw wish to have some 
occup. he ha been blame, he sai, for not seek someth 
that kind, and he would like to stai in thi neighborhood becaus 
on care for him elsewher.”

dorothea felt that thi wa a consider to soften her husband.
howev, he did not speak, and she present recur to dr. 
and the archdeacon’s breakfast. but there wa no longer sunshin 
these subject.

the next morn, without dorothea’s knowledg, mr. casaubon 
the follow letter, begin “dear mr. ladislaw” (he had 
befor address him as “will”):—

“mr. casaubon inform me that a propos ha been made to you, 
(accord to an infer by no mean stretch) ha on your part 
in some degre entertain, which involv your resid in 
neighborhood in a capac which i am justifi in sai touch 
own posit in such a wai as render it not onli natur 
warrant in me when that effect is view under the influenc 
legitim feel, but incumb on me when the same effect 
consid in the light of my respons, to state at onc 
your accept of the propos abov indic would be 
offens to me. that i have some claim to the exercis of a veto here,
would not, i believ, be deni by ani reason person cogniz 
the relat between us: relat which, though thrown into the 
by your recent procedur, ar not therebi annul in their 
of determin anteced. i will not here make reflect on 
person’s judgment. it is enough for me to point out to yourself 
there ar certain social fit and proprieti which should 
a somewhat near rel of mine from becom ani wise conspicu 
thi vicin in a statu not onli much beneath my own, but 
at best with the sciolism of literari or polit adventur. at 
rate, the contrari issu must exclud you from further recept at 
hous.


your faithfulli,
“edward casaubon.”


meanwhil dorothea’s mind wa innoc at work toward the 
embitter of her husband; dwell, with a sympathi that grew 
agit, on what will had told her about hi parent 
grandpar. ani privat hour in her dai were usual spent in 
blue-green boudoir, and she had come to be veri fond of it 
quaint. noth had been outwardli alter there; but while 
summer had gradual advanc over the western field beyond the 
of elm, the bare room had gather within it those memori of 
inward life which fill the air as with a cloud of good or bad angel,
the invis yet activ form of our spiritu triumph or 
spiritu fall. she had been so us to struggl for and to 
resolv in look along the avenu toward the arch of western 
that the vision itself had gain a commun power. even the 
stag seem to have remind glanc and to mean mute, “ye, 
know.” and the group of delic touch miniatur had made 
audienc as of be no longer disturb about their own earthli lot,
but still humanli interest. especi the mysteri “aunt julia”
about whom dorothea had never found it easi to question her husband.

and now, sinc her convers with will, mani fresh imag 
gather round that aunt julia who wa will’s grandmoth; the 
of that delic miniatur, so like a live face that she knew,
help to concentr her feel. what a wrong, to cut off the 
from the famili protect and inherit onli becaus she had 
a man who wa poor! dorothea, earli troubl her elder with 
about the fact around her, had wrought herself into some 
clear as to the histor, polit reason why eldest son 
superior right, and why land should be entail: those reason,
impress her with a certain aw, might be weightier than she knew,
but here wa a question of ti which left them uninfring. here wa 
daughter whose child—even accord to the ordinari ap 
aristocrat institut by peopl who ar no more aristocrat 
retir grocer, and who have no more land to “keep togeth” than 
lawn and a paddock—would have a prior claim. wa inherit a 
of like or of respons? all the energi of dorothea’s 
went on the side of respons—the fulfil of claim found 
our own deed, such as marriag and parentag.

it wa true, she said to herself, that mr. casaubon had a debt to 
ladislaw—that he had to pai back what the ladislaw had been 
of. and now she began to think of her husband’s will, which had 
made at the time of their marriag, leav the bulk of hi properti 
her, with proviso in case of her have children. that ought to 
alter; and no time ought to be lost. thi veri question which 
just arisen about will ladislaw’s occup, wa the occas 
place thing on a new, right foot. her husband, she felt sure,
accord to all hi previou conduct, would be readi to take the 
view, if she propos it—she, in whose interest an unfair 
of the properti had been urg. hi sens of right had surmount 
would continu to surmount anyth that might be call antipathi. 
suspect that her uncl’s scheme wa disapprov by mr. casaubon, 
thi made it seem all the more opportun that a fresh 
should be begun, so that instead of will’s start penniless 
accept the first function that offer itself, he should 
himself in possess of a right incom which should be paid by 
husband dure hi life, and, by an immedi alter of the will,
should be secur at hi death. the vision of all thi as what ought 
be done seem to dorothea like a sudden let in of daylight, 
her from her previou stupid and incuri self-absorb 
about her husband’s relat to other. will ladislaw had refus mr.
casaubon’s futur aid on a ground that no longer appear right to her;
and mr. casaubon had never himself seen fulli what wa the claim 
him. “but he will!” said dorothea. “the great strength of hi 
li here. and what ar we do with our monei? we make no us of 
of our incom. my own monei bui me noth but an uneasi conscienc.”

there wa a peculiar fascin for dorothea in thi divis 
properti intend for herself, and alwai regard by her as excess.
she wa blind, you see, to mani thing obviou to other—like 
tread in the wrong place, as celia had warn her; yet her 
to whatev did not lie in her own pure purpos carri her safe 
the side of precipic where vision would have been peril with fear.

the thought which had gather vivid in the solitud of 
boudoir occupi her incessantli through the dai on which mr. 
had sent hi letter to will. everyth seem hindranc to her 
she could find an opportun of open her heart to her husband. 
hi preoccupi mind all subject were to be approach gentli, and 
had never sinc hi ill lost from her conscious the dread 
agit him. but when young ardor is set brood over the 
of a prompt deed, the deed itself seem to start forth with 
life, master ideal obstacl. the dai pass in a sombr fashion,
not unusu, though mr. casaubon wa perhap unusu silent; 
there were hour of the night which might be count on 
opportun of convers; for dorothea, when awar of 
husband’s sleepless, had establish a habit of rise, light 
candl, and read him to sleep again. and thi night she wa from 
begin sleepless, excit by resolv. he slept as usual for a 
hour, but she had risen softli and had sat in the dark for 
an hour befor he said—

“dorothea, sinc you ar up, will you light a candl?”

“do you feel ill, dear?” wa her first question, as she obei him.

“no, not at all; but i shall be oblig, sinc you ar up, if you 
read me a few page of lowth.”

“mai i talk to you a littl instead?” said dorothea.

“certainli.”

“i have been think about monei all dai—that i have alwai had 
much, and especi the prospect of too much.”

“these, my dear dorothea, ar providenti arrang.”

“but if on ha too much in consequ of other be wrong, 
seem to me that the divin voic which tell us to set that 
right must be obei.”

“what, my love, is the bear of your remark?”

“that you have been too liber in arrang for me—i mean, 
regard to properti; and that make me unhappi.”

“how so? i have none but compar distant connect.”

“i have been led to think about your aunt julia, and how she wa 
in poverti onli becaus she marri a poor man, an act which wa 
disgrac, sinc he wa not unworthi. it wa on that ground, i know,
that you educ mr. ladislaw and provid for hi mother.”

dorothea wait a few moment for some answer that would help 
onward. none came, and her next word seem the more forcibl to her,
fall clear upon the dark silenc.

“but sure we should regard hi claim as a much greater on, even 
the half of that properti which i know that you have destin for me.
and i think he ought at onc to be provid for on that understand.
it is not right that he should be in the depend of poverti while 
ar rich. and if there is ani object to the propos he mention,
the give him hi true place and hi true share would set asid 
motiv for hi accept it.”

“mr. ladislaw ha probabl been speak to you on thi subject?” 
mr. casaubon, with a certain bite quick not habitu to him.

“inde, no!” said dorothea, earnestli. “how can you imagin it, 
he ha so late declin everyth from you? i fear you think 
hardli of him, dear. he onli told me a littl about hi parent 
grandpar, and almost all in answer to my question. you ar 
good, so just—you have done everyth you thought to be right. but 
seem to me clear that more than that is right; and i must speak 
it, sinc i am the person who would get what is call benefit by 
‘more’ not be done.”

there wa a percept paus befor mr. casaubon repli, not 
as befor, but with a still more bite emphasi.

“dorothea, my love, thi is not the first occas, but it were 
that it should be the last, on which you have assum a judgment 
subject beyond your scope. into the question how far conduct,
especi in the matter of allianc, constitut a forfeitur 
famili claim, i do not now enter. suffic it, that you ar not 
qualifi to discrimin. what i now wish you to understand is, that 
accept no revis, still less dictat within that rang of 
which i have deliber upon as distinctli and properli mine. it 
not for you to interfer between me and mr. ladislaw, and still less 
encourag commun from him to you which constitut a 
on my procedur.”

poor dorothea, shroud in the dark, wa in a tumult of 
emot. alarm at the possibl effect on himself of her husband’
strongli manifest anger, would have check ani express of her 
resent, even if she had been quit free from doubt and 
under the conscious that there might be some justic in hi 
insinu. hear him breath quickli after he had spoken, she 
listen, frighten, wretch—with a dumb inward cry for help to 
thi nightmar of a life in which everi energi wa arrest by dread.
but noth els happen, except that thei both remain a long 
sleepless, without speak again.

the next dai, mr. casaubon receiv the follow answer from 
ladislaw:—

“dear mr. casaubon,—i have given all due consider to your 
of yesterdai, but i am unabl to take precis your view of our 
posit. with the fullest acknowledg of your gener conduct 
me in the past, i must still maintain that an oblig of thi 
cannot fairli fetter me as you appear to expect that it should. 
that a benefactor’s wish mai constitut a claim; there must alwai 
a reserv as to the qualiti of those wish. thei mai 
clash with more imper consider. or a benefactor’s veto 
impos such a negat on a man’s life that the consequ blank 
be more cruel than the benefact wa gener. i am mere 
strong illustr. in the present case i am unabl to take your 
of the bear which my accept of occup—not 
certainli, but not dishonor—will have on your own posit 
seem to me too substanti to be affect in that shadowi manner. 
though i do not believ that ani chang in our relat will 
(certainli none ha yet occur) which can nullifi the 
impos on me by the past, pardon me for not see that 
oblig should restrain me from us the ordinari freedom 
live where i choos, and maintain myself by ani law 
i mai choos. regret that there exist thi differ between 
as to a relat in which the confer of benefit ha been 
on your side—


i remain, your with persist oblig,
will ladislaw.”


poor mr. casaubon felt (and must not we, be imparti, feel with 
a littl?) that no man had juster caus for disgust and suspicion 
he. young ladislaw, he wa sure, meant to defi and annoi him, meant 
win dorothea’s confid and sow her mind with disrespect, and 
avers, toward her husband. some motiv beneath the surfac had 
need to account for will’s sudden chang of cours in reject mr.
casaubon’s aid and quit hi travel; and thi defiant 
to fix himself in the neighborhood by take up someth so much 
varianc with hi former choic as mr. brook’s middlemarch project,
reveal clearli enough that the undeclar motiv had relat 
dorothea. not for on moment did mr. casaubon suspect dorothea of 
doubl: he had no suspicion of her, but he had (what wa 
less uncomfort) the posit knowledg that her tendenc to 
opinion about her husband’s conduct wa accompani with a 
to regard will ladislaw favor and be influenc by what he said.
hi own proud retic had prevent him from ever be undeceiv 
the supposit that dorothea had origin ask her uncl to 
will to hi hous.

and now, on receiv will’s letter, mr. casaubon had to consid 
duti. he would never have been easi to call hi action anyth 
than duti; but in thi case, contend motiv thrust him back 
negat.

should he appli directli to mr. brook, and demand of that 
gentleman to revok hi propos? or should he consult sir 
chettam, and get him to concur in remonstr against a step 
touch the whole famili? in either case mr. casaubon wa awar 
failur wa just as probabl as success. it wa imposs for him 
mention dorothea’s name in the matter, and without some 
urgenc mr. brook wa as like as not, after meet 
represent with appar assent, to wind up by sai, “
fear, casaubon! depend upon it, young ladislaw will do you credit.
depend upon it, i have put my finger on the right thing.” and mr.
casaubon shrank nervous from commun on the subject with 
jame chettam, between whom and himself there had never been 
cordial, and who would immedi think of dorothea without 
mention of her.

poor mr. casaubon wa distrust of everybodi’s feel toward him,
especi as a husband. to let ani on suppos that he wa 
would be to admit their (suspect) view of hi disadvantag: to 
them know that he did not find marriag particularli bliss 
impli hi convers to their (probabl) earlier disapprov. it 
be as bad as let carp, and brasenos gener, know how 
he wa in organ the matter for hi “kei to all mytholog.” 
through hi life mr. casaubon had been try not to admit even 
himself the inward sore of self-doubt and jealousi. and on the 
delic of all person subject, the habit of proud 
retic told doubli.

thu mr. casaubon remain proudli, bitterli silent. but he 
forbidden will to come to lowick manor, and he wa mental 
other measur of frustrat.




chapter xxxviii.

“c’est beaucoup que le jugement de homm sur le action humain;
tôt ou tard il devient efficac.”—guizot.


sir jame chettam could not look with ani satisfact on mr. brook’
new cours; but it wa easier to object than to hinder. sir 
account for hi have come in alon on dai to lunch with 
cadwallad by sai—

“i can’t talk to you as i want, befor celia: it might hurt her.
inde, it would not be right.”

“i know what you mean—the ‘pioneer’ at the grang!” dart in mr.
cadwallad, almost befor the last word wa off her friend’s tongu.
“it is fright—thi take to bui whistl and blow them 
everybodi’s hear. ly in bed all dai and plai at domino, 
poor lord plessi, would be more privat and bearabl.”

“i see thei ar begin to attack our friend brook in 
‘trumpet,’” said the rector, loung back and smile easili, as 
would have done if he had been attack himself. “there ar 
sarcasm against a landlord not a hundr mile from middlemarch, 
receiv hi own rent, and make no return.”

“i do wish brook would leav that off,” said sir jame, with 
littl frown of annoy.

“is he realli go to be put in nomin, though?” said mr.
cadwallad. “i saw farebroth yesterdai—he’s whiggish himself, 
brougham and us knowledg; that’s the worst i know of him;—and 
sai that brook is get up a pretti strong parti. bulstrod, 
banker, is hi foremost man. but he think brook would come off 
at a nomin.”

“exactli,” said sir jame, with earnest. “i have been 
into the thing, for i’ve never known anyth about 
polit befor—the counti be my busi. what brook trust to, 
that thei ar go to turn out oliv becaus he is a peelit. 
hawlei tell me that if thei send up a whig at all it is sure to 
bagster, on of those candid who come from heaven know where, 
dead against minist, and an experienc parliamentari man. hawlei’
rather rough: he forgot that he wa speak to me. he said if 
want a pelt, he could get it cheaper than by go to 
hust.”

“i warn you all of it,” said mr. cadwallad, wave her 
outward. “i said to humphrei long ago, mr. brook is go to make 
splash in the mud. and now he ha done it.”

“well, he might have taken it into hi head to marri,” said the rector.
“that would have been a graver mess than a littl flirtat 
polit.”

“he mai do that afterward,” said mr. cadwallad—“when he ha 
out on the other side of the mud with an agu.”

“what i care for most is hi own digniti,” said sir jame. “of cours 
care the more becaus of the famili. but he’s get on in life now,
and i don’t like to think of hi expos himself. thei will be 
up everyth against him.”

“i suppos it’s no us try ani persuas,” said the rector.
“there’s such an odd mixtur of obstinaci and changeabl in brook.
have you tri him on the subject?”

“well, no,” said sir jame; “i feel a delicaci in appear to dictat.
but i have been talk to thi young ladislaw that brook is make 
factotum of. ladislaw seem clever enough for anyth. i thought it 
well to hear what he had to sai; and he is against brook’s 
thi time. i think he’ll turn him round: i think the nomin mai 
stave off.”

“i know,” said mr. cadwallad, nod. “the independ 
hasn’t got hi speech well enough by heart.”

“but thi ladislaw—there again is a vexati busi,” said 
jame. “we have had him two or three time to dine at the hall (
have met him, by the bye) as brook’s guest and a relat 
casaubon’s, think he wa onli on a fly visit. and now i find he’
in everybodi’s mouth in middlemarch as the editor of the ‘pioneer.’
there ar stori go about him as a quill-drive alien, a 
emissari, and what not.”

“casaubon won’t like that,” said the rector.

“there _is_ some foreign blood in ladislaw,” return sir jame. “
hope he won’t go into extrem opinion and carri brook on.”

“oh, he’s a danger young sprig, that mr. ladislaw,” said mr.
cadwallad, “with hi opera song and hi readi tongu. a sort 
byron hero—an amor conspir, it strike me. and thoma 
is not fond of him. i could see that, the dai the pictur wa brought.”

“i don’t like to begin on the subject with casaubon,” said sir jame.
“he ha more right to interfer than i. but it’s a disagre 
all round. what a charact for anybodi with decent connect to 
himself in!—on of those newspap fellow! you have onli to look 
keck, who manag the ‘trumpet.’ i saw him the other dai with hawlei.
hi write is sound enough, i believ, but he’s such a low fellow,
that i wish he had been on the wrong side.”

“what can you expect with these peddl middlemarch paper?” said 
rector. “i don’t suppos you could get a high style of man anywher 
be write up interest he doesn’t realli care about, and for pai 
hardli keep him in at elbow.”

“exactli: that make it so annoi that brook should have put a 
who ha a sort of connect with the famili in a posit of 
kind. for my part, i think ladislaw is rather a fool for accept.”

“it is aquina’s fault,” said mr. cadwallad. “why didn’t he us 
interest to get ladislaw made an _attach_ or sent to india? that 
how famili get rid of troublesom sprig.”

“there is no know to what length the mischief mai go,” said 
jame, anxious. “but if casaubon sai noth, what can i do?”

“oh my dear sir jame,” said the rector, “don’t let us make too much 
all thi. it is like enough to end in mere smoke. after a month 
two brook and thi master ladislaw will get tire of each other;
ladislaw will take wing; brook will sell the ‘pioneer,’ and 
will settl down again as usual.”

“there is on good chanc—that he will not like to feel hi 
ooz awai,” said mr. cadwallad. “if i knew the item of 
expens i could scare him. it’s no us ply him with wide word 
expenditur: i wouldn’t talk of phlebotomi, i would empti a pot 
leech upon him. what we good stingi peopl don’t like, is have 
sixpenc suck awai from us.”

“and he will not like have thing rake up against him,” said 
jame. “there is the manag of hi estat. thei have begun 
that alreadi. and it realli is pain for me to see. it is a 
under on’s veri nose. i do think on is bound to do the best for on’
land and tenant, especi in these hard time.”

“perhap the ‘trumpet’ mai rous him to make a chang, and some 
mai come of it all,” said the rector. “i know i should be glad. 
should hear less grumbl when my tith is paid. i don’t know what 
should do if there were not a modu in tipton.”

“i want him to have a proper man to look after thing—i want him 
take on garth again,” said sir jame. “he got rid of garth twelv 
ago, and everyth ha been go wrong sinc. i think of 
garth to manag for me—he ha made such a capit plan for 
build; and lovegood is hardli up to the mark. but garth would 
undertak the tipton estat again unless brook left it entir 
him.”

“in the right of it too,” said the rector. “garth is an 
fellow: an origin, simpl-mind fellow. on dai, when he wa 
some valuat for me, he told me point-blank that clergymen 
understood anyth about busi, and did mischief when thei meddl;
but he said it as quietli and respectfulli as if he had been talk 
me about sailor. he would make a differ parish of tipton, if 
would let him manag. i wish, by the help of the ‘trumpet,’ you 
bring that round.”

“if dorothea had kept near her uncl, there would have been 
chanc,” said sir jame. “she might have got some power over him 
time, and she wa alwai uneasi about the estat. she had 
good notion about such thing. but now casaubon take her up entir.
celia complain a good deal. we can hardli get her to dine with us,
sinc he had that fit.” sir jame end with a look of piti disgust,
and mr. cadwallad shrug her shoulder as much as to sai 
_she_ wa not like to see anyth new in that direct.

“poor casaubon!” the rector said. “that wa a nasti attack. i 
he look shatter the other dai at the archdeacon’s.”

“in point of fact,” resum sir jame, not choos to dwell on “fit,”
“brook doesn’t mean badli by hi tenant or ani on els, but he 
got that wai of pare and clip at expens.”

“come, that’s a bless,” said mr. cadwallad. “that help him 
find himself in a morn. he mai not know hi own opinion, but 
doe know hi own pocket.”

“i don’t believ a man is in pocket by stingi on hi land,” 
sir jame.

“oh, stingi mai be abus like other virtu: it will not do 
keep on’s own pig lean,” said mr. cadwallad, who had risen to 
out of the window. “but talk of an independ politician and he 
appear.”

“what! brook?” said her husband.

“ye. now, you ply him with the ‘trumpet,’ humphrei; and i will put 
leech on him. what will you do, sir jame?”

“the fact is, i don’t like to begin about it with brook, in our 
posit; the whole thing is so unpleas. i do wish peopl 
behav like gentlemen,” said the good baronet, feel that thi wa 
simpl and comprehens programm for social well-be.

“here you all ar, eh?” said mr. brook, shuffl round and 
hand. “i wa go up to the hall by-and-by, chettam. but it’
pleasant to find everybodi, you know. well, what do you think 
thing?—go on a littl fast! it wa true enough, what 
said—‘sinc yesterdai, a centuri ha pass awai:’—thei’re in the 
centuri, you know, on the other side of the water. go on faster 
we ar.”

“why, ye,” said the rector, take up the newspap. “here is 
‘trumpet’ accus you of lag behind—did you see?”

“eh? no,” said mr. brook, drop hi glove into hi hat and 
adjust hi ey-glass. but mr. cadwallad kept the paper in 
hand, sai, with a smile in hi ey—

“look here! all thi is about a landlord not a hundr mile 
middlemarch, who receiv hi own rent. thei sai he is the 
retrogress man in the counti. i think you must have taught them 
word in the ‘pioneer.’”

“oh, that is keck—an illiter fellow, you know. retrogress, now!
come, that’s capit. he think it mean destruct: thei want to 
me out a destruct, you know,” said mr. brook, with 
cheer which is usual sustain by an adversari’s ignor.

“i think he know the mean of the word. here is a sharp stroke 
two. _if we had to describ a man who is retrogress in the most 
sens of the word—we should sai, he is on who would dub himself 
reform of our constitut, while everi interest for which he 
immedi respons is go to decai: a philanthropist who 
bear on rogu to be hang, but doe not mind five honest 
be half-starv: a man who shriek at corrupt, and keep 
farm at rack-rent: who roar himself red at rotten borough, and 
not mind if everi field on hi farm ha a rotten gate: a man 
open-heart to leed and manchest, no doubt; he would give 
number of repres who will pai for their seat out of their 
pocket: what he object to give, is a littl return on rent-dai 
help a tenant to bui stock, or an outlai on repair to keep the 
out at a tenant’s barn-door or make hi hous look a littl less 
an irish cottier’s. but we all know the wag’s definit of 
philanthropist: a man whose chariti increas directli as the squar 
the distanc._ and so on. all the rest is to show what sort 
legisl a philanthropist is like to make,” end the rector,
throw down the paper, and clasp hi hand at the back of 
head, while he look at mr. brook with an air of amus neutral.

“come, that’s rather good, you know,” said mr. brook, take up 
paper and try to bear the attack as easili as hi neighbor did, 
color and smile rather nervous; “that about roar himself 
at rotten borough—i never made a speech about rotten borough in 
life. and as to roar myself red and that kind of thing—these 
never understand what is good satir. satir, you know, should be 
up to a certain point. i recollect thei said that in ‘the edinburgh’
somewher—it must be true up to a certain point.”

“well, that is realli a hit about the gate,” said sir jame, 
to tread carefulli. “daglei complain to me the other dai that 
hadn’t got a decent gate on hi farm. garth ha invent a new 
of gate—i wish you would try it. on ought to us some of on’s 
in that wai.”

“you go in for fanci farm, you know, chettam,” said mr. brook,
appear to glanc over the column of the “trumpet.” “that’s 
hobbi, and you don’t mind the expens.”

“i thought the most expens hobbi in the world wa stand 
parliament,” said mr. cadwallad. “thei said the last 
candid at middlemarch—gile, wasn’t hi name?—spent ten 
pound and fail becaus he did not bribe enough. what a 
reflect for a man!”

“somebodi wa sai,” said the rector, laughingli, “that east 
wa noth to middlemarch, for briberi.”

“noth of the kind,” said mr. brook. “the tori bribe, you know:
hawlei and hi set bribe with treat, hot codl, and that sort 
thing; and thei bring the voter drunk to the poll. but thei ar 
go to have it their own wai in futur—not in futur, you know.
middlemarch is a littl backward, i admit—the freemen ar a 
backward. but we shall educ them—we shall bring them on, you know.
the best peopl there ar on our side.”

“hawlei sai you have men on your side who will do you harm,” 
sir jame. “he sai bulstrod the banker will do you harm.”

“and that if you got pelt,” interpos mr. cadwallad, “half 
rotten egg would mean hatr of your committe-man. good heaven!
think what it must be to be pelt for wrong opinion. and i seem 
rememb a stori of a man thei pretend to chair and let him fall 
a dust-heap on purpos!”

“pelt is noth to their find hole in on’s coat,” said 
rector. “i confess that’s what i should be afraid of, if we parson 
to stand at the hust for prefer. i should be afraid of 
reckon up all my fish dai. upon my word, i think the truth 
the hardest missil on can be pelt with.”

“the fact is,” said sir jame, “if a man goe into public life he 
be prepar for the consequ. he must make himself proof 
calumni.”

“my dear chettam, that is all veri fine, you know,” said mr. brook.
“but how will you make yourself proof against calumni? you should 
histori—look at ostrac, persecut, martyrdom, and that kind 
thing. thei alwai happen to the best men, you know. but what is 
in horac?—_fiat justitia, ruat_ … someth or other.”

“exactli,” said sir jame, with a littl more heat than usual. “what 
mean by be proof against calumni is be abl to point to the 
as a contradict.”

“and it is not martyrdom to pai bill that on ha run into on’
self,” said mr. cadwallad.

but it wa sir jame’s evid annoy that most stir mr. brook.
“well, you know, chettam,” he said, rise, take up hi hat 
lean on hi stick, “you and i have a differ system. you ar 
for outlai with your farm. i don’t want to make out that my system 
good under all circumst—under all circumst, you know.”

“there ought to be a new valuat made from time to time,” said 
jame. “return ar veri well occasion, but i like a 
valuat. what do you sai, cadwallad?”

“i agre with you. if i were brook, i would choke the ‘trumpet’ 
onc by get garth to make a new valuat of the farm, and 
him _cart blanch_ about gate and repair: that’s my view of 
polit situat,” said the rector, broaden himself by 
hi thumb in hi armhol, and laugh toward mr. brook.

“that’s a showi sort of thing to do, you know,” said mr. brook. “but 
should like you to tell me of anoth landlord who ha distress 
tenant for arrear as littl as i have. i let the old tenant stai on.
i’m uncommonli easi, let me tell you, uncommonli easi. i have my 
idea, and i take my stand on them, you know. a man who doe that 
alwai charg with eccentr, inconsist, and that kind 
thing. when i chang my line of action, i shall follow my own idea.”

after that, mr. brook rememb that there wa a packet which he 
omit to send off from the grang, and he bade everybodi 
good-by.

“i didn’t want to take a liberti with brook,” said sir jame; “i 
he is nettl. but as to what he sai about old tenant, in point 
fact no new tenant would take the farm on the present term.”

“i have a notion that he will be brought round in time,” said 
rector. “but you were pull on wai, elinor, and we were 
anoth. you want to frighten him awai from expens, and we want 
frighten him into it. better let him try to be popular and see that 
charact as a landlord stand in hi wai. i don’t think it 
two straw about the ‘pioneer,’ or ladislaw, or brook’s 
to the middlemarch. but it doe signifi about the parishion 
tipton be comfort.”

“excus me, it is you two who ar on the wrong tack,” said mr.
cadwallad. “you should have prove to him that he lose monei by 
manag, and then we should all have pull togeth. if you put 
a-horseback on polit, i warn you of the consequ. it wa 
veri well to ride on stick at home and call them idea.”




chapter xxxix.

“if, as i have, you also doe,
    vertu attir in woman see,
and dare love that, and sai so too,
    and forget the he and she;

and if thi love, though place so,
    from prophan men you hide,
which will no faith on thi bestow,
    or, if thei doe, derid:

then you have done a braver 
    than all the worthi did,
and a braver thenc will spring,
    which is, to keep that hid.”
—dr. donn.


sir jame chettam’s mind wa not fruit in devic, but hi 
anxieti to “act on brook,” onc brought close to hi constant 
in dorothea’s capac for influenc, becam form, and issu in 
littl plan; name, to plead celia’s indisposit as a reason 
fetch dorothea by herself to the hall, and to leav her at 
grang with the carriag on the wai, after make her fulli awar 
the situat concern the manag of the estat.

in thi wai it happen that on dai near four o’clock, when mr. 
and ladislaw were seat in the librari, the door open and mr.
casaubon wa announc.

will, the moment befor, had been low in the depth of boredom, and,
oblig to help mr. brook in arrang “document” about 
sheep-stealer, wa exemplifi the power our mind have of 
sever hors at onc by inwardli arrang measur toward get 
lodg for himself in middlemarch and cut short hi 
resid at the grang; while there flit through all these 
imag a tickl vision of a sheep-steal epic written with 
particular. when mr. casaubon wa announc he start up as 
an electr shock, and felt a tingl at hi finger-end. ani 
observ him would have seen a chang in hi complexion, in 
adjust of hi facial muscl, in the vivid of hi glanc, 
might have made them imagin that everi molecul in hi bodi had 
the messag of a magic touch. and so it had. for effect magic 
transcend natur; and who shall measur the subtleti of 
touch which convei the qualiti of soul as well as bodi, and make 
man’s passion for on woman differ from hi passion for anoth as 
in the morn light over vallei and river and white mountain-
differ from joi among chines lantern and glass panel? will, too,
wa made of veri impress stuff. the bow of a violin drawn near 
cleverli, would at on stroke chang the aspect of the world for him,
and hi point of view shift as easili as hi mood. dorothea’
entranc wa the fresh of morn.

“well, my dear, thi is pleasant, now,” said mr. brook, meet 
kiss her. “you have left casaubon with hi book, i suppos. that’
right. we must not have you get too learn for a woman, you know.”

“there is no fear of that, uncl,” said dorothea, turn to will 
shake hand with open cheer, while she made no other form 
greet, but went on answer her uncl. “i am veri slow. when i 
to be busi with book, i am often plai truant among my thought. 
find it is not so easi to be learn as to plan cottag.”

she seat herself besid her uncl opposit to will, and wa 
preoccupi with someth that made her almost unmind of him. 
wa ridicul disappoint, as if he had imagin that her 
had anyth to do with him.

“why, ye, my dear, it wa quit your hobbi to draw plan. but it 
good to break that off a littl. hobbi ar apt to run awai with us,
you know; it doesn’t do to be run awai with. we must keep the rein. 
have never let myself be run awai with; i alwai pull up. that 
what i tell ladislaw. he and i ar alik, you know: he like to go 
everyth. we ar work at capit punish. we shall do a 
deal togeth, ladislaw and i.”

“ye,” said dorothea, with characterist direct, “sir jame 
been tell me that he is in hope of see a great chang made 
in your manag of the estat—that you ar think of have 
farm valu, and repair made, and the cottag improv, so 
tipton mai look quit anoth place. oh, how happi!”—she went on,
clasp her hand, with a return to that more childlik 
manner, which had been subdu sinc her marriag. “if i were at 
still, i should take to ride again, that i might go about with 
and see all that! and you ar go to engag mr. garth, who prais 
cottag, sir jame sai.”

“chettam is a littl hasti, my dear,” said mr. brook, 
slightli; “a littl hasti, you know. i never said i should do 
of the kind. i never said i should _not_ do it, you know.”

“he onli feel confid that you will do it,” said dorothea, in 
voic as clear and unhesit as that of a young chorist chant 
credo, “becaus you mean to enter parliament as a member who care 
the improv of the peopl, and on of the first thing to be 
better is the state of the land and the labor. think of kit down,
uncl, who live with hi wife and seven children in a hous with 
sit room and on bedroom hardli larger than thi tabl!—and 
poor daglei, in their tumbl-down farmhous, where thei live in 
back kitchen and leav the other room to the rat! that is on 
why i did not like the pictur here, dear uncl—which you think 
stupid about. i us to come from the villag with all that dirt 
coars ugli like a pain within me, and the simper pictur 
the draw-room seem to me like a wick attempt to find delight 
what is fals, while we don’t mind how hard the truth is for 
neighbor outsid our wall. i think we have no right to come 
and urg wider chang for good, until we have tri to alter the 
which lie under our own hand.”

dorothea had gather emot as she went on, and had 
everyth except the relief of pour forth her feel, uncheck:
an experi onc habitu with her, but hardli ever present sinc 
marriag, which had been a perpetu struggl of energi with fear. 
the moment, will’s admir wa accompani with a chill sens 
remot. a man is seldom asham of feel that he cannot love 
woman so well when he see a certain great in her: natur 
intend great for men. but natur ha sometim made 
oversight in carri out her intent; as in the case of good mr.
brook, whose masculin conscious wa at thi moment in rather 
stammer condit under the eloqu of hi niec. he could 
immedi find ani other mode of express himself than that 
rise, fix hi ey-glass, and finger the paper befor him. 
last he said—

“there is someth in what you sai, my dear, someth in what 
sai—but not everyth—eh, ladislaw? you and i don’t like our 
and statu be found fault with. young ladi ar a littl ardent,
you know—a littl on-side, my dear. fine art, poetri, that kind 
thing, elev a nation—_emollit more_—you understand a littl 
now. but—eh? what?”

these interrog were address to the footman who had come in 
sai that the keeper had found on of daglei’s boi with a leveret 
hi hand just kill.

“i’ll come, i’ll come. i shall let him off easili, you know,” said mr.
brook asid to dorothea, shuffl awai veri cheerfulli.

“i hope you feel how right thi chang is that i—that sir jame 
for,” said dorothea to will, as soon as her uncl wa gone.

“i do, now i have heard you speak about it. i shall not forget what 
have said. but can you think of someth els at thi moment? i 
not have anoth opportun of speak to you about what 
occur,” said will, rise with a movement of impati, and 
the back of hi chair with both hand.

“prai tell me what it is,” said dorothea, anxious, also rise 
go to the open window, where monk wa look in, pant 
wag hi tail. she lean her back against the window-frame, 
laid her hand on the dog’s head; for though, as we know, she wa 
fond of pet that must be held in the hand or trodden on, she 
alwai attent to the feel of dog, and veri polit if she had 
declin their advanc.

will follow her onli with hi ey and said, “i presum you know 
mr. casaubon ha forbidden me to go to hi hous.”

“no, i did not,” said dorothea, after a moment’s paus. she 
evid much move. “i am veri, veri sorri,” she ad, mournfulli.
she wa think of what will had no knowledg of—the 
between her and her husband in the dark; and she wa anew 
with hopeless that she could influenc mr. casaubon’s action. 
the mark express of her sorrow convinc will that it wa not 
given to him person, and that dorothea had not been visit by 
idea that mr. casaubon’s dislik and jealousi of him turn 
herself. he felt an odd mixtur of delight and vexat: of 
that he could dwell and be cherish in her thought as in a pure home,
without suspicion and without stint—of vexat becaus he wa of 
littl account with her, wa not formid enough, wa treat with 
unhesit benevol which did not flatter him. but hi dread 
ani chang in dorothea wa stronger than hi discont, and he 
to speak again in a tone of mere explan.

“mr. casaubon’s reason is, hi displeasur at my take a posit 
which he consid unsuit to my rank as hi cousin. i have told 
that i cannot give wai on thi point. it is a littl too hard on me 
expect that my cours in life is to be hamper by prejudic which 
think ridicul. oblig mai be stretch till it is no better 
a brand of slaveri stamp on us when we were too young to know 
mean. i would not have accept the posit if i had not meant 
make it us and honor. i am not bound to regard famili 
in ani other light.”

dorothea felt wretch. she thought her husband altogeth in 
wrong, on more ground than will had mention.

“it is better for us not to speak on the subject,” she said, with 
tremul not common in her voic, “sinc you and mr. 
disagre. you intend to remain?” she wa look out on the lawn, 
melancholi medit.

“ye; but i shall hardli ever see you now,” said will, in a tone 
almost boyish complaint.

“no,” said dorothea, turn her ey full upon him, “hardli ever. 
i shall hear of you. i shall know what you ar do for my uncl.”

“i shall know hardli anyth about you,” said will. “no on will 
me anyth.”

“oh, my life is veri simpl,” said dorothea, her lip curl with 
exquisit smile, which irradi her melancholi. “i am alwai 
lowick.”

“that is a dread imprison,” said will, impetu.

“no, don’t think that,” said dorothea. “i have no long.”

he did not speak, but she repli to some chang in hi express. “
mean, for myself. except that i should like not to have so much 
than my share without do anyth for other. but i have a belief 
my own, and it comfort me.”

“what is that?” said will, rather jealou of the belief.

“that by desir what is perfectli good, even when we don’t quit 
what it is and cannot do what we would, we ar part of the divin 
against evil—widen the skirt of light and make the struggl 
dark narrow.”

“that is a beauti mystic—it is a—”

“pleas not to call it by ani name,” said dorothea, put out 
hand entreatingli. “you will sai it is persian, or someth 
geograph. it is my life. i have found it out, and cannot part 
it. i have alwai been find out my religion sinc i wa a 
girl. i us to prai so much—now i hardli ever prai. i try not to 
desir mere for myself, becaus thei mai not be good for other, 
i have too much alreadi. i onli told you, that you might know 
well how my dai go at lowick.”

“god bless you for tell me!” said will, ardent, and 
wonder at himself. thei were look at each other like two 
children who were talk confidenti of bird.

“what is _your_ religion?” said dorothea. “i mean—not what you 
about religion, but the belief that help you most?”

“to love what is good and beauti when i see it,” said will. “but 
am a rebel: i don’t feel bound, as you do, to submit to what i don’
like.”

“but if you like what is good, that come to the same thing,” 
dorothea, smile.

“now you ar subtl,” said will.

“ye; mr. casaubon often sai i am too subtl. i don’t feel as if 
were subtl,” said dorothea, playfulli. “but how long my uncl is! 
must go and look for him. i must realli go on to the hall. celia 
expect me.”

will offer to tell mr. brook, who present came and said that 
would step into the carriag and go with dorothea as far as daglei’s,
to speak about the small delinqu who had been caught with 
leveret. dorothea renew the subject of the estat as thei 
along, but mr. brook, not be taken unawar, got the talk under 
own control.

“chettam, now,” he repli; “he find fault with me, my dear; but 
should not preserv my game if it were not for chettam, and he can’
sai that that expens is for the sake of the tenant, you know. it’s 
littl against my feel:—poach, now, if you come to look into it—
have often thought of get up the subject. not long ago, flavel,
the methodist preacher, wa brought up for knock down a hare 
came across hi path when he and hi wife were walk out togeth. 
wa pretti quick, and knock it on the neck.”

“that wa veri brutal, i think,” said dorothea.

“well, now, it seem rather black to me, i confess, in a 
preacher, you know. and johnson said, ‘you mai judg what a hypo_crite_
he is.’ and upon my word, i thought flavel look veri littl 
‘the highest style of man’—as somebodi call the christian—young, 
poet young, i think—you know young? well, now, flavel in hi 
black gaiter, plead that he thought the lord had sent him and 
wife a good dinner, and he had a right to knock it down, though not 
mighti hunter befor the lord, as nimrod wa—i assur you it wa 
comic: field would have made someth of it—or scott, now—
might have work it up. but realli, when i came to think of it, 
couldn’t help like that the fellow should have a bit of hare to 
grace over. it’s all a matter of prejudic—prejudic with the law 
it side, you know—about the stick and the gaiter, and so on. howev,
it doesn’t do to reason about thing; and law is law. but i got 
to be quiet, and i hush the matter up. i doubt whether chettam 
not have been more sever, and yet he come down on me as if i were 
hardest man in the counti. but here we ar at daglei’s.”

mr. brook got down at a farmyard-gate, and dorothea drove on. it 
wonder how much uglier thing will look when we onli suspect that 
ar blame for them. even our own person in the glass ar apt 
chang their aspect for us after we have heard some frank remark 
their less admir point; and on the other hand it is 
how pleasantli conscienc take our encroach on those who 
complain or have nobodi to complain for them. daglei’s homestead 
befor look so dismal to mr. brook as it did todai, with hi 
thu sore about the fault-find of the “trumpet,” echo by 
jame.

it is true that an observ, under that soften influenc of the 
art which make other peopl’s hardship picturesqu, might have 
delight with thi homestead call freeman’s end: the old hous 
dormer-window in the dark red roof, two of the chimnei were 
with ivi, the larg porch wa block up with bundl of stick, 
half the window were close with grai worm-eaten shutter about 
the jasmin-bough grew in wild luxuri; the moulder garden 
with hollyhock peep over it wa a perfect studi of highli 
subdu color, and there wa an ag goat (kept doubtless 
interest superstiti ground) ly against the open back-
door. the mossi thatch of the cow-shed, the broken grai barn-door, 
pauper labor in rag breech who had nearli finish unload 
wagon of corn into the barn readi for earli thrash; the scanti 
of cow be tether for milk and leav on half of the shed 
brown empti; the veri pig and white duck seem to wander 
the uneven neglect yard as if in low spirit from feed on a 
meagr qualiti of rins,—all these object under the quiet light 
a sky marbl with high cloud would have made a sort of pictur 
we have all paus over as a “charm bit,” touch 
sensibl than those which ar stir by the depress of 
agricultur interest, with the sad lack of farm capit, as 
constantli in the newspap of that time. but these 
associ were just now strongli present to mr. brook, and 
the scene for him. mr. daglei himself made a figur in the landscap,
carri a pitchfork and wear hi milk-hat—a veri old 
flatten in front. hi coat and breech were the best he had, and 
would not have been wear them on thi weekdai occas if he had 
been to market and return later than usual, have given himself 
rare treat of dine at the public tabl of the blue bull. how he 
to fall into thi extravag would perhap be matter of wonder 
himself on the morrow; but befor dinner someth in the state of 
countri, a slight paus in the harvest befor the far dip were cut,
the stori about the new king and the numer handbil on the wall,
had seem to warrant a littl reckless. it wa a maxim 
middlemarch, and regard as self-evid, that good meat should 
good drink, which last daglei interpret as plenti of tabl al 
follow up by rum-and-water. these liquor have so far truth in 
that thei were not fals enough to make poor daglei seem merri: 
onli made hi discont less tongu-ti than usual. he had also 
too much in the shape of muddi polit talk, a stimul 
disturb to hi farm conservat, which consist in hold 
whatev is, is bad, and ani chang is like to be wors. he 
flush, and hi ey had a decidedli quarrelsom stare as he 
still grasp hi pitchfork, while the landlord approach with 
easi shuffl walk, on hand in hi trouser-pocket and the 
swing round a thin walk-stick.

“daglei, my good fellow,” began mr. brook, consciou that he wa 
to be veri friendli about the boi.

“oh, ay, i’m a good feller, am i? thank ye, sir, thank ye,” 
daglei, with a loud snarl ironi which made fag the sheep-dog 
from hi seat and prick hi ear; but see monk enter the yard 
some outsid loiter, fag seat himself again in an attitud 
observ. “i’m glad to hear i’m a good feller.”

mr. brook reflect that it wa market-dai, and that hi worthi 
had probabl been dine, but saw no reason why he should not go on,
sinc he could take the precaut of repeat what he had to sai 
mr. daglei.

“your littl lad jacob ha been caught kill a leveret, daglei: 
have told johnson to lock him up in the empti stabl an hour or two,
just to frighten him, you know. but he will be brought home by-and-by,
befor night: and you’ll just look after him, will you, and give him 
reprimand, you know?”

“no, i woon’t: i’ll be dee’d if i’ll leather my boi to pleas you 
anybodi els, not if you wa twenti landlord istid o’ on, and that 
bad un.”

daglei’s word were loud enough to summon hi wife to the back-
door—the onli entranc ever us, and on alwai open except in 
weather—and mr. brook, sai soothingli, “well, well, i’ll speak 
your wife—i didn’t mean beat, you know,” turn to walk to 
hous. but daglei, onli the more inclin to “have hi sai” with 
gentleman who walk awai from him, follow at onc, with 
slouch at hi heel and sullenli evad some small and 
charit advanc on the part of monk.

“how do you do, mr. daglei?” said mr. brook, make some hast. “
came to tell you about your boi: i don’t want you to give him 
stick, you know.” he wa care to speak quit plainli thi time.

overwork mr. daglei—a thin, worn woman, from whose life pleasur 
so entir vanish that she had not even ani sundai cloth 
could give her satisfact in prepar for church—had alreadi had 
misunderstand with her husband sinc he had come home, and wa 
low spirit, expect the worst. but her husband wa beforehand 
answer.

“no, nor he woon’t hev the stick, whether you want it or no,” 
daglei, throw out hi voic, as if he want it to hit hard. “you’
got no call to come an’ talk about stick o’ these primis, as 
woon’t give a stick tow’rt mend. go to middlemarch to ax for _your_
charrickt.”

“you’d far better hold your tongu, daglei,” said the wife, “and 
kick your own trough over. when a man as is father of a famili ha 
an’ spent monei at market and made himself the wors for liquor, he’
done enough mischief for on dai. but i should like to know what 
boi’s done, sir.”

“niver do you mind what he’s done,” said daglei, more fierc, “it’
my busi to speak, an’ not yourn. an’ i wull speak, too. i’ll hev 
sai—supper or no. an’ what i sai is, as i’ve live upo’ your 
from my father and grandfath afor me, an’ hev drop our 
into’t, an’ me an’ my children might lie an’ rot on the ground 
top-dressin’ as we can’t find the monei to bui, if the king wasn’t 
put a stop.”

“my good fellow, you’re drunk, you know,” said mr. brook,
confidenti but not judici. “anoth dai, anoth dai,” 
ad, turn as if to go.

but daglei immedi front him, and fag at hi heel growl low,
as hi master’s voic grew louder and more insult, while monk 
drew close in silent dignifi watch. the labor on the wagon 
paus to listen, and it seem wiser to be quit passiv than 
attempt a ridicul flight pursu by a bawl man.

“i’m no more drunk nor you ar, nor so much,” said daglei. “i can 
my liquor, an’ i know what i meean. an’ i meean as the king ’ull put 
stop to ’t, for them sai it as know it, as there’s to be a rinform,
and them landlord as never done the right thing by their tenant ’
be treat i’ that wai as thei’ll hev to scuttl off. an’ there’s 
i’ middlemarch know what the rinform is—an’ as know who’ll hev 
scuttl. sai thei, ‘i know who _your_ landlord is.’ an’ sai i, ‘
hope you’re the better for knowin’ him, i arn’t.’ sai thei, ‘he’s 
close-fist un.’ ‘ay ay,’ sai i. ‘he’s a man for the rinform,’ 
thei. that’s what thei sai. an’ i made out what the rinform were—an’
it were to send you an’ your like a-scuttlin’ an’ wi’ 
strong-smellin’ thing too. an’ you mai do as you like now, for i’
none afeard on you. an’ you’d better let my boi aloan, an’ look 
yoursen, afor the rinform ha got upo’ your back. that’s what i’n 
to sai,” conclud mr. daglei, strike hi fork into the ground with 
firm which prove inconveni as he tri to draw it up again.

at thi last action monk began to bark loudli, and it wa a moment 
mr. brook to escap. he walk out of the yard as quickli as he could,
in some amaz at the novelti of hi situat. he had never 
insult on hi own land befor, and had been inclin to 
himself as a gener favorit (we ar all apt to do so, when we 
of our own amiabl more than of what other peopl ar like to 
of us). when he had quarrel with caleb garth twelv year befor 
had thought that the tenant would be pleas at the landlord’s 
everyth into hi own hand.

some who follow the narr of hi experi mai wonder at 
midnight dark of mr. daglei; but noth wa easier in those 
than for an hereditari farmer of hi grade to be ignor, in 
somehow of have a rector in the twin parish who wa a gentleman 
the backbon, a curat nearer at hand who preach more learnedli 
the rector, a landlord who had gone into everyth, especi 
art and social improv, and all the light of middlemarch 
three mile off. as to the facil with which mortal 
knowledg, try an averag acquaint in the intellectu blaze 
london, and consid what that elig person for a dinner-parti 
have been if he had learn scant skill in “sum” from 
parish-clerk of tipton, and read a chapter in the bibl with 
difficulti, becaus such name as isaiah or apollo 
unmanag after twice spell. poor daglei read a few 
sometim on a sundai even, and the world wa at least not darker 
him than it had been befor. some thing he knew thoroughli, name,
the slovenli habit of farm, and the awkward of weather, 
and crop, at freeman’s end—so call appar by wai of sarcasm, 
impli that a man wa free to quit it if he chose, but that there wa 
earthli “beyond” open to him.




chapter xl.

wise in hi daili work wa he:
    to fruit of dilig,
and not to faith or politi,
    he pli hi utmost sens.
these perfect in their littl part,
    whose work is all their prize—
without them how could law, or art,
    or tower citi rise?


in watch effect, if onli of an electr batteri, it is 
necessari to chang our place and examin a particular mixtur or 
at some distanc from the point where the movement we ar interest 
wa set up. the group i am move toward is at caleb garth’
breakfast-tabl in the larg parlor where the map and desk were:
father, mother, and five of the children. mari wa just now at 
wait for a situat, while christi, the boi next to her, 
get cheap learn and cheap fare in scotland, have to 
father’s disappoint taken to book instead of that sacr 
“busi.”

the letter had come—nine costli letter, for which the postman 
been paid three and twopenc, and mr. garth wa forget hi tea 
toast while he read hi letter and laid them open on abov the other,
sometim swai hi head slowli, sometim screw up hi mouth 
inward debat, but not forget to cut off a larg red seal unbroken,
which letti snatch up like an eager terrier.

the talk among the rest went on unrestrainedli, for noth 
caleb’s absorpt except shake the tabl when he wa write.

two letter of the nine had been for mari. after read them, she 
pass them to her mother, and sat plai with her tea-spoon absent,
till with a sudden recollect she return to her sew, which 
had kept on her lap dure breakfast.

“oh, don’t sew, mari!” said ben, pull her arm down. “make me 
peacock with thi bread-crumb.” he had been knead a small mass 
the purpos.

“no, no, mischief!” said mari, good-humoredli, while she prick 
hand lightli with her needl. “try and mould it yourself: you have 
me do it often enough. i must get thi sew done. it is for 
vinci: she is to be marri next week, and she can’t be marri 
thi handkerchief.” mari end merrili, amus with the last notion.

“why can’t she, mari?” said letti, serious interest in 
mysteri, and push her head so close to her sister that mari 
turn the threaten needl toward letti’s nose.

“becaus thi is on of a dozen, and without it there would onli 
eleven,” said mari, with a grave air of explan, so that letti 
back with a sens of knowledg.

“have you made up your mind, my dear?” said mr. garth, lai 
letter down.

“i shall go to the school at york,” said mari. “i am less unfit 
teach in a school than in a famili. i like to teach class best. and,
you see, i must teach: there is noth els to be done.”

“teach seem to me the most delight work in the world,” said mr.
garth, with a touch of rebuk in her tone. “i could understand 
object to it if you had not knowledg enough, mari, or if 
dislik children.”

“i suppos we never quit understand why anoth dislik what we like,
mother,” said mari, rather curtli. “i am not fond of a schoolroom: 
like the outsid world better. it is a veri inconveni fault 
mine.”

“it must be veri stupid to be alwai in a girl’ school,” said alfr.
“such a set of nincompoop, like mr. ballard’s pupil walk two 
two.”

“and thei have no game worth plai at,” said jim. “thei can 
throw nor leap. i don’t wonder at mari’s not like it.”

“what is that mari doesn’t like, eh?” said the father, look over 
spectacl and paus befor he open hi next letter.

“be among a lot of nincompoop girl,” said alfr.

“is it the situat you had heard of, mari?” said caleb, gentli,
look at hi daughter.

“ye, father: the school at york. i have determin to take it. it 
quit the best. thirti-five pound a-year, and extra pai for 
the smallest strummer at the piano.”

“poor child! i wish she could stai at home with us, susan,” said caleb,
look plaintiv at hi wife.

“mari would not be happi without do her duti,” said mr. garth,
magisteri, consciou of have done her own.

“it wouldn’t make me happi to do such a nasti duti as that,” 
alfr—at which mari and her father laugh silent, but mr. 
said, grave—

“do find a fitter word than nasti, my dear alfr, for everyth 
you think disagre. and suppos that mari could help you to go 
mr. hanmer’s with the monei she get?”

“that seem to me a great shame. but she’s an old brick,” said alfr,
rise from hi chair, and pull mari’s head backward to kiss her.

mari color and laugh, but could not conceal that the tear 
come. caleb, look on over hi spectacl, with the angl of 
eyebrow fall, had an express of mingl delight and sorrow as 
return to the open of hi letter; and even mr. garth, her 
curl with a calm content, allow that inappropri languag 
pass without correct, although ben immedi took it up, and sang,
“she’s an old brick, old brick, old brick!” to a canter measur,
which he beat out with hi fist on mari’s arm.

but mr. garth’s ey were now drawn toward her husband, who 
alreadi deep in the letter he wa read. hi face had an 
of grave surpris, which alarm her a littl, but he did not like 
be question while he wa read, and she remain anxious 
till she saw him suddenli shaken by a littl joyou laugh as he 
back to the begin of the letter, and look at her abov 
spectacl, said, in a low tone, “what do you think, susan?”

she went and stood behind him, put her hand on hi shoulder, 
thei read the letter togeth. it wa from sir jame chettam, 
to mr. garth the manag of the famili estat at freshitt 
elsewher, and ad that sir jame had been request by mr. 
of tipton to ascertain whether mr. garth would be dispos at the 
time to resum the agenc of the tipton properti. the baronet ad 
veri oblig word that he himself wa particularli desir of 
the freshitt and tipton estat under the same manag, and he 
to be abl to show that the doubl agenc might be held on 
agreeabl to mr. garth, whom he would be glad to see at the hall 
twelv o’clock on the follow dai.

“he write handsom, doesn’t he, susan?” said caleb, turn hi 
upward to hi wife, who rais her hand from hi shoulder to hi ear,
while she rest her chin on hi head. “brook didn’t like to ask 
himself, i can see,” he continu, laugh silent.

“here is an honor to your father, children,” said mr. garth, 
round at the five pair of ey, all fix on the parent. “he is 
to take a post again by those who dismiss him long ago. that 
that he did hi work well, so that thei feel the want of him.”

“like cincinnatu—hoorai!” said ben, ride on hi chair, with 
pleasant confid that disciplin wa relax.

“will thei come to fetch him, mother?” said letti, think of 
mayor and corpor in their robe.

mr. garth pat letti’s head and smile, but see that her 
wa gather up hi letter and like soon to be out of reach in 
sanctuari “busi,” she press hi shoulder and said emphat—

“now, mind you ask fair pai, caleb.”

“oh ye,” said caleb, in a deep voic of assent, as if it would 
unreason to suppos anyth els of him. “it’ll come to 
four and five hundr, the two togeth.” then with a littl start 
remembr he said, “mari, write and give up that school. stai 
help your mother. i’m as pleas as punch, now i’ve thought of that.”

no manner could have been less like that of punch triumphant 
caleb’s, but hi talent did not lie in find phrase, though he 
veri particular about hi letter-write, and regard hi wife as 
treasuri of correct languag.

there wa almost an uproar among the children now, and mari held up 
cambric embroideri toward her mother entreatingli, that it might 
put out of reach while the boi drag her into a danc. mr. garth,
in placid joi, began to put the cup and plate togeth, while 
push hi chair from the tabl, as if he were go to move to 
desk, still sat hold hi letter in hi hand and look on 
ground medit, stretch out the finger of hi left hand,
accord to a mute languag of hi own. at last he said—

“it’s a thousand piti christi didn’t take to busi, susan. i 
want help by-and-by. and alfr must go off to the engin—i’
made up my mind to that.” he fell into medit and finger-
again for a littl while, and then continu: “i shall make brook 
new agreement with the tenant, and i shall draw up a rotat 
crop. and i’ll lai a wager we can get fine brick out of the clai 
bott’s corner. i must look into that: it would cheapen the repair.
it’s a fine bit of work, susan! a man without a famili would be glad 
do it for noth.”

“mind you don’t, though,” said hi wife, lift up her finger.

“no, no; but it’s a fine thing to come to a man when he’s seen into 
natur of busi: to have the chanc of get a bit of the 
into good fettl, as thei sai, and put men into the right wai 
their farm, and get a bit of good contriv and solid 
done—that those who ar live and those who come after will be 
better for. i’d sooner have it than a fortun. i hold it the 
honor work that is.” here caleb laid down hi letter, thrust 
finger between the button of hi waistcoat, and sat upright, 
present proceed with some aw in hi voic and move hi 
slowli asid—“it’s a great gift of god, susan.”

“that it is, caleb,” said hi wife, with answer fervor. “and it 
be a bless to your children to have had a father who did such work:
a father whose good work remain though hi name mai be forgotten.” 
could not sai ani more to him then about the pai.

in the even, when caleb, rather tire with hi dai’s work, 
seat in silenc with hi pocket-book open on hi knee, while mr.
garth and mari were at their sew, and letti in a corner 
whisper a dialogu with her doll, mr. farebroth came up 
orchard walk, divid the bright august light and shadow with 
tuft grass and the appl-tree bough. we know that he wa fond of 
parishion the garth, and had thought mari worth mention 
lydgat. he us to the full the clergyman’s privileg of 
the middlemarch discrimin of rank, and alwai told hi 
that mr. garth wa more of a ladi than ani matron in the town. still,
you see, he spent hi even at the vinci’, where the matron, 
less of a ladi, presid over a well-lit draw-room and whist. 
those dai human intercours wa not determin sole by respect. 
the vicar did heartili respect the garth, and a visit from him wa 
surpris to that famili. nevertheless he account for it even while 
wa shake hand, by sai, “i come as an envoi, mr. garth: i 
someth to sai to you and garth on behalf of fred vinci. the fact is,
poor fellow,” he continu, as he seat himself and look round 
hi bright glanc at the three who were listen to him, “he ha 
me into hi confid.”

mari’s heart beat rather quickli: she wonder how far fred’
confid had gone.

“we haven’t seen the lad for month,” said caleb. “i couldn’t 
what wa becom of him.”

“he ha been awai on a visit,” said the vicar, “becaus home wa 
littl too hot for him, and lydgat told hi mother that the 
fellow must not begin to studi yet. but yesterdai he came and 
himself out to me. i am veri glad he did, becaus i have seen him 
up from a youngster of fourteen, and i am so much at home in the 
that the children ar like nephew and niec to me. but it is 
difficult case to advis upon. howev, he ha ask me to come 
tell you that he is go awai, and that he is so miser about 
debt to you, and hi inabl to pai, that he can’t bear to 
himself even to bid you good by.”

“tell him it doesn’t signifi a farth,” said caleb, wave hi hand.
“we’ve had the pinch and have got over it. and now i’m go to be 
rich as a jew.”

“which mean,” said mr. garth, smile at the vicar, “that we 
go to have enough to bring up the boi well and to keep mari 
home.”

“what is the treasur-trove?” said mr. farebroth.

“i’m go to be agent for two estat, freshitt and tipton; 
perhap for a pretti littl bit of land in lowick besid: it’s all 
same famili connect, and employ spread like water if it’s 
set go. it make me veri happi, mr. farebroth”—here caleb 
back hi head a littl, and spread hi arm on the elbow of 
chair—“that i’ve got an opportun again with the let of the land,
and carri out a notion or two with improv. it’s a 
uncommonli cramp thing, as i’ve often told susan, to sit 
horseback and look over the hedg at the wrong thing, and not be 
to put your hand to it to make it right. what peopl do who go 
polit i can’t think: it drive me almost mad to see 
over onli a few hundr acr.”

it wa seldom that caleb volunt so long a speech, but 
happi had the effect of mountain air: hi ey were bright, and 
word came without effort.

“i congratul you heartili, garth,” said the vicar. “thi is the 
sort of new i could have had to carri to fred vinci, for he dwelt 
good deal on the injuri he had done you in caus you to part 
monei—rob you of it, he said—which you want for other purpos. 
wish fred were not such an idl dog; he ha some veri good point, 
hi father is a littl hard upon him.”

“where is he go?” said mr. garth, rather coldli.

“he mean to try again for hi degre, and he is go up to 
befor term. i have advis him to do that. i don’t urg him to 
the church—on the contrari. but if he will go and work so as to pass,
that will be some guarante that he ha energi and a will; and he 
quit at sea; he doesn’t know what els to do. so far he will 
hi father, and i have promis in the mean time to try and 
vinci to hi son’s adopt some other line of life. fred sai 
he is not fit for a clergyman, and i would do anyth i could 
hinder a man from the fatal step of choos the wrong profess. 
quot to me what you said, miss garth—do you rememb it?” (mr.
farebroth us to sai “mari” instead of “miss garth,” but it wa 
of hi delicaci to treat her with the more defer becaus, 
to mr. vinci’s phrase, she work for her bread.)

mari felt uncomfort, but, determin to take the matter lightli,
answer at onc, “i have said so mani impertin thing to fred—
ar such old playfellow.”

“you said, accord to him, that he would be on of those 
clergymen who help to make the whole clergi ridicul. realli, 
wa so cut that i felt a littl cut myself.”

caleb laugh. “she get her tongu from you, susan,” he said, 
some enjoy.

“not it flippanc, father,” said mari, quickli, fear that 
mother would be displeas. “it is rather too bad of fred to repeat 
flippant speech to mr. farebroth.”

“it wa certainli a hasti speech, my dear,” said mr. garth, with 
speak evil of digniti wa a high misdemeanor. “we should not 
our vicar the less becaus there wa a ridicul curat in the 
parish.”

“there’s someth in what she sai, though,” said caleb, not 
to have mari’s sharp undervalu. “a bad workman of ani sort 
hi fellow mistrust. thing hang togeth,” he ad, look on 
floor and move hi feet uneasili with a sens that word 
scantier than thought.

“clearli,” said the vicar, amus. “by be contempt we set men’
mind to the tune of contempt. i certainli agre with miss garth’s 
of the matter, whether i am condemn by it or not. but as to 
vinci, it is onli fair he should be excus a littl: 
featherston’s delus behavior did help to spoil him. there 
someth quit diabol in not leav him a farth after all. 
fred ha the good tast not to dwell on that. and what he care 
about is have offend you, mr. garth; he suppos you will 
think well of him again.”

“i have been disappoint in fred,” said mr. garth, with decis.
“but i shall be readi to think well of him again when he give me 
reason to do so.”

at thi point mari went out of the room, take letti with her.

“oh, we must forgiv young peopl when thei’re sorri,” said caleb,
watch mari close the door. “and as you sai, mr. farebroth, 
wa the veri devil in that old man. now mari’s gone out, i must 
you a thing—it’s onli known to susan and me, and you’ll not tell 
again. the old scoundrel want mari to burn on of the will the 
night he di, when she wa sit up with him by herself, and 
offer her a sum of monei that he had in the box by him if she 
do it. but mari, you understand, could do no such thing—would not 
handl hi iron chest, and so on. now, you see, the will he 
burnt wa thi last, so that if mari had done what he want, 
vinci would have had ten thousand pound. the old man did turn to 
at the last. that touch poor mari close; she couldn’t help it—she 
in the right to do what she did, but she feel, as she sai, much as 
she had knock down somebodi’s properti and broken it against 
will, when she wa rightfulli defend herself. i feel with her,
somehow, and if i could make ani amend to the poor lad, instead 
bear him a grudg for the harm he did us, i should be glad to do it.
now, what is your opinion, sir? susan doesn’t agre with me; 
sai—tell what you sai, susan.”

“mari could not have act otherwis, even if she had known what 
be the effect on fred,” said mr. garth, paus from her work, 
look at mr. farebroth.

“and she wa quit ignor of it. it seem to me, a loss which 
on anoth becaus we have done right is not to lie upon 
conscienc.”

the vicar did not answer immedi, and caleb said, “it’s 
feel. the child feel in that wai, and i feel with her. you don’
mean your hors to tread on a dog when you’re back out of the wai;
but it goe through you, when it’s done.”

“i am sure mr. garth would agre with you there,” said mr.
farebroth, who for some reason seem more inclin to rumin 
to speak. “on could hardli sai that the feel you mention about 
is wrong—or rather, mistaken—though no man ought to make a claim 
such feel.”

“well, well,” said caleb, “it’s a secret. you will not tell fred.”

“certainli not. but i shall carri the other good new—that you 
afford the loss he caus you.”

mr. farebroth left the hous soon after, and see mari in 
orchard with letti, went to sai good-by to her. thei made a 
pictur in the western light which brought out the bright of 
appl on the old scant-leav bough—mari in her lavend gingham 
black ribbon hold a basket, while letti in her well-worn 
pick up the fallen appl. if you want to know more particularli 
mari look, ten to on you will see a face like her in the 
street to-morrow, if you ar there on the watch: she will not be 
those daughter of zion who ar haughti, and walk with stretch-
neck and wanton ey, minc as thei go: let all those pass, and 
your ey on some small plump brownish person of firm but 
carriag, who look about her, but doe not suppos that anybodi 
look at her. if she ha a broad face and squar brow, well-
eyebrow and curli dark hair, a certain express of amus in 
glanc which her mouth keep the secret of, and for the rest 
entir insignific—take that ordinari but not disagre 
for a portrait of mari garth. if you made her smile, she would show 
perfect littl teeth; if you made her angri, she would not rais 
voic, but would probabl sai on of the bitterest thing you have 
tast the flavor of; if you did her a kind, she would never 
it. mari admir the keen-face handsom littl vicar in 
well-brush threadbar cloth more than ani man she had had 
opportun of know. she had never heard him sai a foolish thing,
though she knew that he did unwis on; and perhap foolish 
were more objection to her than ani of mr. farebroth’s 
do. at least, it wa remark that the actual imperfect 
the vicar’s cleric charact never seem to call forth the 
scorn and dislik which she show beforehand for the 
imperfect of the cleric charact sustain by fred vinci. 
irregular of judgment, i imagin, ar found even in riper 
than mari garth’s: our imparti is kept for abstract merit 
demerit, which none of us ever saw. will ani on guess toward which 
those wide differ men mari had the peculiar woman’
tender?—the on she wa most inclin to be sever on, or 
contrari?

“have you ani messag for your old playfellow, miss garth?” said 
vicar, as he took a fragrant appl from the basket which she 
toward him, and put it in hi pocket. “someth to soften down 
harsh judgment? i am go straight to see him.”

“no,” said mari, shake her head, and smile. “if i were to sai 
he would not be ridicul as a clergyman, i must sai that he would 
someth wors than ridicul. but i am veri glad to hear that he 
go awai to work.”

“on the other hand, i am veri glad to hear that _you_ ar not 
awai to work. my mother, i am sure, will be all the happier if you 
come to see her at the vicarag: you know she is fond of have 
peopl to talk to, and she ha a great deal to tell about old time.
you will realli be do a kind.”

“i should like it veri much, if i mai,” said mari. “everyth 
too happi for me all at onc. i thought it would alwai be part of 
life to long for home, and lose that grievanc make me feel 
empti: i suppos it serv instead of sens to fill up my mind?”

“mai i go with you, mari?” whisper letti—a most inconveni child,
who listen to everyth. but she wa made exult by have 
chin pinch and her cheek kiss by mr. farebroth—an incid 
she narrat to her mother and father.

as the vicar walk to lowick, ani on watch him close might 
seen him twice shrug hi shoulder. i think that the rare 
who have thi gestur ar never of the heavi type—for fear of 
lumber instanc to the contrari, i will sai, hardli ever; thei 
usual a fine tempera and much toler toward the 
error of men (themselv inclus). the vicar wa hold an 
dialogu in which he told himself that there wa probabl 
more between fred and mari garth than the regard of old playfellow,
and repli with a question whether that bit of womanhood were not 
great deal too choic for that crude young gentleman. the rejoind 
thi wa the first shrug. then he laugh at himself for be 
to have felt jealou, as if he had been a man abl to marri, which,
ad he, it is as clear as ani balanc-sheet that i am not. 
follow the second shrug.

what could two men, so differ from each other, see in thi “
patch,” as mari call herself? it wa certainli not her plain 
attract them (and let all plain young ladi be warn against 
danger encourag given them by societi to confid in their 
of beauti). a human be in thi ag nation of our is a 
wonder whole, the slow creation of long interchang influenc:
and charm is a result of two such whole, the on love and the 
love.

when mr. and mr. garth were sit alon, caleb said, “susan, 
what i’m think of.”

“the rotat of crop,” said mr. garth, smile at him, abov 
knit, “or els the back-door of the tipton cottag.”

“no,” said caleb, grave; “i am think that i could do a great 
for fred vinci. christi’s gone, alfr will be gone soon, and it 
be five year befor jim is readi to take to busi. i shall 
help, and fred might come in and learn the natur of thing and 
under me, and it might be the make of him into a us man, if 
give up be a parson. what do you think?”

“i think, there is hardli anyth honest that hi famili would 
to more,” said mr. garth, decidedli.

“what care i about their object?” said caleb, with a 
which he wa apt to show when he had an opinion. “the lad is of ag 
must get hi bread. he ha sens enough and quick enough; he 
be on the land, and it’s my belief that he could learn busi 
if he gave hi mind to it.”

“but would he? hi father and mother want him to be a fine gentleman,
and i think he ha the same sort of feel himself. thei all think 
beneath them. and if the propos came from you, i am sure mr. 
would sai that we want fred for mari.”

“life is a poor tale, if it is to be settl by nonsens of that sort,”
said caleb, with disgust.

“ye, but there is a certain pride which is proper, caleb.”

“i call it improp pride to let fool’ notion hinder you from do 
good action. there’s no sort of work,” said caleb, with fervor, 
out hi hand and move it up and down to mark hi emphasi, “
could ever be done well, if you mind what fool sai. you must have 
insid you that your plan is right, and that plan you must follow.”

“i will not oppos ani plan you have set your mind on, caleb,” 
mr. garth, who wa a firm woman, but knew that there were some 
on which her mild husband wa yet firmer. “still, it seem to be 
that fred is to go back to colleg: will it not be better to wait 
see what he will choos to do after that? it is not easi to keep 
against their will. and you ar not yet quit sure enough of your 
posit, or what you will want.”

“well, it mai be better to wait a bit. but as to my get plenti 
work for two, i’m pretti sure of that. i’ve alwai had my hand 
with scatter thing, and there’s alwai someth fresh turn up.
why, onli yesterdai—bless me, i don’t think i told you!—it wa 
odd that two men should have been at me on differ side to do 
same bit of valu. and who do you think thei were?” said caleb,
take a pinch of snuff and hold it up between hi finger, as if 
were a part of hi exposit. he wa fond of a pinch when it 
to him, but he usual forgot that thi indulg wa at hi command.

hi wife held down her knit and look attent.

“why, that rigg, or rigg featherston, wa on. but bulstrod 
befor him, so i’m go to do it for bulstrod. whether it’s 
or purchas thei’re go for, i can’t tell yet.”

“can that man be go to sell the land just left him—which he 
taken the name for?” said mr. garth.

“deuc know,” said caleb, who never refer the knowledg 
discredit do to ani higher power than the deuc. “but 
ha long been want to get a handsom bit of land under 
finger—that i know. and it’s a difficult matter to get, in thi 
of the countri.”

caleb scatter hi snuff carefulli instead of take it, and 
ad, “the in and out of thing ar curiou. here is the 
thei’ve been all along expect for fred, which it seem the old 
never meant to leav him a foot of, but left it to thi side-slip of 
son that he kept in the dark, and thought of hi stick there 
vex everybodi as well as he could have vex ’em himself if he 
have kept aliv. i sai, it would be curiou if it got into bulstrod’
hand after all. the old man hate him, and never would bank with him.”

“what reason could the miser creatur have for hate a man whom 
had noth to do with?” said mr. garth.

“pooh! where’s the us of ask for such fellow’ reason? the soul 
man,” said caleb, with the deep tone and grave shake of the head 
alwai came when he us thi phrase—“the soul of man, when it 
fairli rotten, will bear you all sort of poison toad-stool, and 
ey can see whenc came the seed thereof.”

it wa on of caleb’s quaint, that in hi difficulti of 
speech for hi thought, he caught, as it were, snatch of 
which he associ with variou point of view or state of mind; 
whenev he had a feel of aw, he wa haunt by a sens of 
phraseolog, though he could hardli have given a strict quotat.




chapter xli.

by swagger could i never thrive,
for the rain it raineth everi dai.
—_twelfth night_.


the transact refer to by caleb garth as have gone 
between mr. bulstrod and mr. joshua rigg featherston concern 
land attach to stone court, had occas the interchang of 
letter or two between these personag.

who shall tell what mai be the effect of write? if it happen to 
been cut in stone, though it lie face down-most for ag on a 
beach, or “rest quietli under the drum and trampl of 
conquest,” it mai end by let us into the secret of usurp 
other scandal gossip about long empir ago:—thi world 
appar a huge whisper-galleri. such condit ar 
minut repres in our petti lifetim. as the stone which 
been kick by gener of clown mai come by curiou littl 
of effect under the ey of a scholar, through whose labor it mai 
last fix the date of invas and unlock religion, so a bit of 
and paper which ha long been an innoc wrap or stop-gap mai 
last be laid open under the on pair of ey which have 
enough to turn it into the open of a catastroph. to uriel 
the progress of planetari histori from the sun, the on result would 
just as much of a coincid as the other.

have made thi rather lofti comparison i am less uneasi in 
attent to the exist of low peopl by whose interfer, 
littl we mai like it, the cours of the world is veri much determin.
it would be well, certainli, if we could help to reduc their number,
and someth might perhap be done by not lightli give occas 
their exist. social speak, joshua rigg would have 
gener pronounc a superflu. but those who like 
featherston never had a copi of themselv demand, ar the veri 
to wait for such a request either in prose or vers. the copi in 
case bore more of outsid resembl to the mother, in whose 
frog-featur, accompani with fresh-color cheek and a well-
figur, ar compat with much charm for a certain order of admir.
the result is sometim a frog-face male, desir, sure, to 
order of intellig be. especi when he is suddenli 
into evid to frustrat other peopl’s expect—the veri 
aspect in which a social superflu can present himself.

but mr. rigg featherston’s low characterist were all of the sober,
water-drink kind. from the earliest to the latest hour of the dai 
wa alwai as sleek, neat, and cool as the frog he resembl, and 
peter had secretli chuckl over an offshoot almost more calcul,
and far more imperturb, than himself. i will add that 
finger-nail were scrupul attend to, and that he meant to 
a well-educ young ladi (as yet unspecifi) whose person wa good,
and whose connect, in a solid middl-class wai, were undeni.
thu hi nail and modesti were compar to those of most gentlemen;
though hi ambit had been educ onli by the opportun of 
clerk and account in the smaller commerci hous of a seaport. 
thought the rural featherston veri simpl absurd peopl, and thei 
their turn regard hi “bring up” in a seaport town as 
exagger of the monstros that their brother peter, and 
more peter’s properti, should have had such belong.

the garden and gravel approach, as seen from the two window of 
wainscot parlor at stone court, were never in better trim than now,
when mr. rigg featherston stood, with hi hand behind him, 
out on these ground as their master. but it seem doubt whether 
look out for the sake of contempl or of turn hi back to 
person who stood in the middl of the room, with hi leg 
apart and hi hand in hi trouser-pocket: a person in all respect 
contrast to the sleek and cool rigg. he wa a man obvious on the 
toward sixti, veri florid and hairi, with much grai in hi 
whisker and thick curli hair, a stoutish bodi which show 
disadvantag the somewhat worn join of hi cloth, and the air 
a swagger, who would aim at be notic even at a show 
firework, regard hi own remark on ani other person’s 
as like to be more interest than the perform itself.

hi name wa john raffl, and he sometim wrote jocos w.a.g. 
hi signatur, observ when he did so, that he wa onc taught 
leonard lamb of finsburi who wrote b.a. after hi name, and that he,
raffl, origin the wittic of call that celebr 
ba-lamb. such were the appear and mental flavor of mr. raffl,
both of which seem to have a stale odor of travel’ room in 
commerci hotel of that period.

“come, now, josh,” he wa sai, in a full rumbl tone, “look at 
in thi light: here is your poor mother go into the vale of year,
and you could afford someth handsom now to make her comfort.”

“not while you live. noth would make her comfort while 
live,” return rigg, in hi cool high voic. “what i give her, you’
take.”

“you bear me a grudg, josh, that i know. but come, now—as between 
and man—without humbug—a littl capit might enabl me to make 
first-rate thing of the shop. the tobacco trade is grow. i 
cut my own nose off in not do the best i could at it. i should 
to it like a flea to a fleec for my own sake. i should alwai be 
the spot. and noth would make your poor mother so happi. i’ve 
well done with my wild oat—turn fifti-five. i want to settl down 
my chimnei-corner. and if i onc buckl to the tobacco trade, i 
bring an amount of brain and experi to bear on it that would 
be found elsewher in a hurri. i don’t want to be bother you 
time after anoth, but to get thing onc for all into the 
channel. consid that, josh—as between man and man—and with your 
mother to be made easi for her life. i wa alwai fond of the 
woman, by jove!”

“have you done?” said mr. rigg, quietli, without look awai from 
window.

“ye, _i_’ve done,” said raffl, take hold of hi hat which 
befor him on the tabl, and give it a sort of orator push.

“then just listen to me. the more you sai anyth, the less i 
believ it. the more you want me to do a thing, the more reason i 
have for never do it. do you think i mean to forget your kick 
when i wa a lad, and eat all the best victual awai from me and 
mother? do you think i forget your alwai come home to sell 
pocket everyth, and go off again leav us in the lurch? 
should be glad to see you whip at the cart-tail. my mother wa 
fool to you: she’d no right to give me a father-in-law, and she’s 
punish for it. she shall have her weekli allow paid and no more:
and that shall be stop if you dare to come on to these 
again, or to come into thi countri after me again. the next time 
show yourself insid the gate here, you shall be driven off with 
dog and the wagon’s whip.”

as rigg pronounc the last word he turn round and look at 
with hi promin frozen ey. the contrast wa as strike as 
could have been eighteen year befor, when rigg wa a most 
kickabl boi, and raffl wa the rather thick-set adoni of bar-
and back-parlor. but the advantag now wa on the side of rigg, 
auditor of thi convers might probabl have expect that 
would retir with the air of a defeat dog. not at all. he made 
grimac which wa habitu with him whenev he wa “out” in a game;
then subsid into a laugh, and drew a brandi-flask from hi pocket.

“come, josh,” he said, in a cajol tone, “give us a spoon 
brandi, and a sovereign to pai the wai back, and i’ll go. honor bright!
i’ll go like a bullet, _by_ jove!”

“mind,” said rigg, draw out a bunch of kei, “if i ever see 
again, i shan’t speak to you. i don’t own you ani more than if i saw 
crow; and if you want to own me you’ll get noth by it but 
charact for be what you ar—a spite, brassi, bulli rogu.”

“that’s a piti, now, josh,” said raffl, affect to scratch hi 
and wrinkl hi brow upward as if he were nonpluss. “i’m veri 
of you; _by_ jove, i am! there’s noth i like better than 
you—you’re so like your mother, and i must do without it. but 
brandi and the sovereign’s a bargain.”

he jerk forward the flask and rigg went to a fine old oaken 
with hi kei. but raffl had remind himself by hi movement 
the flask that it had becom danger loos from it 
cover, and catch sight of a fold paper which had fallen 
the fender, he took it up and shove it under the leather so as to 
the glass firm.

by that time rigg came forward with a brandi-bottl, fill the flask,
and hand raffl a sovereign, neither look at him nor speak 
him. after lock up the bureau again, he walk to the window 
gaze out as impass as he had done at the begin of 
interview, while raffl took a small allow from the flask, 
it up, and deposit it in hi side-pocket, with provok slow,
make a grimac at hi stepson’s back.

“farewel, josh—and if forev!” said raffl, turn back hi head 
he open the door.

rigg saw him leav the ground and enter the lane. the grai dai 
turn to a light drizzl rain, which freshen the hedgerow and 
grassi border of the by-road, and hasten the labor who 
load the last shock of corn. raffl, walk with the uneasi 
of a town loiter oblig to do a bit of countri journei on foot,
look as incongru amid thi moist rural quiet and industri as if 
had been a baboon escap from a menageri. but there were none 
stare at him except the long-wean calv, and none to show dislik 
hi appear except the littl water-rat which rustl awai at 
approach.

he wa fortun enough when he got on to the highroad to be 
by the stage-coach, which carri him to brass; and there he 
the new-made railwai, observ to hi fellow-passeng that 
consid it pretti well season now it had done for huskisson. mr.
raffl on most occas kept up the sens of have been educ 
an academi, and be abl, if he chose, to pass well everywher;
inde, there wa not on of hi fellow-men whom he did not 
himself in a posit to ridicul and torment, confid of 
entertain which he thu gave to all the rest of the compani.

he plai thi part now with as much spirit as if hi journei had 
entir success, resort at frequent interv to hi flask. 
paper with which he had wedg it wa a letter sign _
bulstrod_, but raffl wa not like to disturb it from it 
us posit.




chapter xlii.

how much, methink, i could despis thi 
were i not bound in chariti against it!
—shakespear: _henri viii_.


on of the profession call made by lydgat soon after hi 
from hi wed-journei wa to lowick manor, in consequ of 
letter which had request him to fix a time for hi visit.

mr. casaubon had never put ani question concern the natur of 
ill to lydgat, nor had he even to dorothea betrai ani anxieti 
to how far it might be like to cut short hi labor or hi life. 
thi point, as on all other, he shrank from piti; and if the 
of be piti for anyth in hi lot surmis or known in spite 
himself wa embitt, the idea of call forth a show of 
by frankli admit an alarm or a sorrow wa necessarili 
to him. everi proud mind know someth of thi experi, 
perhap it is onli to be overcom by a sens of fellowship deep 
to make all effort at isol seem mean and petti instead 
exalt.

but mr. casaubon wa now brood over someth through which 
question of hi health and life haunt hi silenc with a 
harass importun even than through the autumn unrip of 
authorship. it is true that thi last might be call hi 
ambit; but there ar some kind of authorship in which by far 
largest result is the uneasi suscept accumul in 
conscious of the author—on know of the river by a few 
amid a long-gather deposit of uncomfort mud. that wa the 
with mr. casaubon’s hard intellectu labor. their most 
result wa not the “kei to all mytholog,” but a morbid 
that other did not give him the place which he had not 
merit—a perpetu suspici conjectur that the view entertain 
him were not to hi advantag—a melancholi absenc of passion in 
effort at achiev, and a passion resist to the 
that he had achiev noth.

thu hi intellectu ambit which seem to other to have 
and dri him, wa realli no secur against wound, least of 
against those which came from dorothea. and he had begun now to 
possibl for the futur which were somehow more embitt to 
than anyth hi mind had dwelt on befor.

against certain fact he wa helpless: against will ladislaw’
exist, hi defiant stai in the neighborhood of lowick, and 
flippant state of mind with regard to the possessor of authent,
well-stamp erudit: against dorothea’s natur, alwai take 
some new shape of ardent activ, and even in submiss and 
cover fervid reason which it wa an irrit to think of: 
certain notion and like which had taken possess of her mind 
relat to subject that he could not possibl discuss with her. 
wa no deni that dorothea wa as virtuou and love a young ladi 
he could have obtain for a wife; but a young ladi turn out to 
someth more troublesom than he had conceiv. she nurs him, 
read to him, she anticip hi want, and wa solicit about 
feel; but there had enter into the husband’s mind the 
that she judg him, and that her wife devoted wa like 
penitenti expiat of unbeliev thought—wa accompani with 
power of comparison by which himself and hi do were seen 
lumin as a part of thing in gener. hi discont 
vapor-like through all her gentl love manifest, and clung 
that inappreci world which she had onli brought nearer to him.

poor mr. casaubon! thi suffer wa the harder to bear becaus 
seem like a betray: the young creatur who had worship him 
perfect trust had quickli turn into the critic wife; and 
instanc of critic and resent had made an impress which 
tender and submiss afterward could remov. to hi 
interpret dorothea’s silenc now wa a suppress rebellion; 
remark from her which he had not in ani wai anticip wa 
assert of consciou superior; her gentl answer had 
irrit cautious in them; and when she acquiesc it wa 
self-approv effort of forbear. the tenac with which he 
to hide thi inward drama made it the more vivid for him; as we 
with the more keen what we wish other not to hear.

instead of wonder at thi result of miseri in mr. casaubon, i 
it quit ordinari. will not a tini speck veri close to our vision 
out the glori of the world, and leav onli a margin by which we see 
blot? i know no speck so troublesom as self. and who, if mr. 
had chosen to expound hi discont—hi suspicion that he wa 
ani longer ador without critic—could have deni that thei 
found on good reason? on the contrari, there wa a strong reason 
be ad, which he had not himself taken explicitli 
account—name, that he wa not unmixedli ador. he suspect thi,
howev, as he suspect other thing, without confess it, and 
the rest of us, felt how sooth it would have been to have 
companion who would never find it out.

thi sore suscept in relat to dorothea wa 
prepar befor will ladislaw had return to lowick, and what 
occur sinc then had brought mr. casaubon’s power of 
construct into exasper activ. to all the fact which he knew,
he ad imaginari fact both present and futur which becam more 
to him than those becaus thei call up a stronger dislik, a 
predomin bitter. suspicion and jealousi of will ladislaw’
intent, suspicion and jealousi of dorothea’s impress, 
constantli at their weav work. it would be quit unjust to him 
suppos that he could have enter into ani coars misinterpret 
dorothea: hi own habit of mind and conduct, quit as much as the 
elev of her natur, save him from ani such mistak. what he 
jealou of wa her opinion, the swai that might be given to her 
mind in it judgment, and the futur possibl to which 
might lead her. as to will, though until hi last defiant letter he 
noth definit which he would choos formal to alleg against him,
he felt himself warrant in believ that he wa capabl of 
design which could fascin a rebelli temper and an 
impuls. he wa quit sure that dorothea wa the caus of will’
return from rome, and hi determin to settl in the neighborhood;
and he wa penetr enough to imagin that dorothea had 
encourag thi cours. it wa as clear as possibl that she wa 
to be attach to will and to be pliant to hi suggest: thei 
never had a _tête-à-tête_ without her bring awai from it some 
troublesom impress, and the last interview that mr. casaubon 
awar of (dorothea, on return from freshitt hall, had for the 
time been silent about have seen will) had led to a scene 
rous an angrier feel against them both than he had ever 
befor. dorothea’s outpour of her notion about monei, in 
dark of the night, had done noth but bring a mixtur of 
odiou forebod into her husband’s mind.

and there wa the shock late given to hi health alwai sadli 
with him. he wa certainli much reviv; he had recov all hi 
power of work: the ill might have been mere fatigu, and 
might still be twenti year of achiev befor him, which 
justifi the thirti year of prepar. that prospect wa made 
sweeter by a flavor of vengeanc against the hasti sneer of carp &
compani; for even when mr. casaubon wa carri hi taper among 
tomb of the past, those modern figur came athwart the dim light, 
interrupt hi dilig explor. to convinc carp of hi mistak,
so that he would have to eat hi own word with a good deal 
indigest, would be an agreeabl accid of triumphant authorship,
which the prospect of live to futur ag on earth and to 
etern in heaven could not exclud from contempl. sinc, thu,
the previs of hi own unend bliss could not nullifi the 
savor of irrit jealousi and vindict, it is the 
surpris that the probabl of a transient earthli bliss for 
person, when he himself should have enter into glori, had not 
potent sweeten effect. if the truth should be that 
undermin diseas wa at work within him, there might be 
opportun for some peopl to be the happier when he wa gone; and 
on of those peopl should be will ladislaw, mr. casaubon object 
strongli that it seem as if the annoy would make part of 
disembodi exist.

thi is a veri bare and therefor a veri incomplet wai of put 
case. the human soul move in mani channel, and mr. casaubon, we know,
had a sens of rectitud and an honor pride in satisfi 
requir of honor, which compel him to find other reason 
hi conduct than those of jealousi and vindict. the wai in 
mr. casaubon put the case wa thi:—“in marri dorothea brook i 
to care for her well-be in case of my death. but well-be is 
to be secur by ampl, independ possess of properti; on 
contrari, occas might aris in which such possess might 
her to the more danger. she is readi prei to ani man who know how 
plai adroitli either on her affection ardor or her 
enthusiasm; and a man stand by with that veri intent in hi mind—
man with no other principl than transient capric, and who ha 
person animos toward me—i am sure of it—an animos which is 
by the conscious of hi ingratitud, and which he ha 
vent in ridicul of which i am as well assur as if i had heard it.
even if i live i shall not be without uneasi as to what he 
attempt through indirect influenc. thi man ha gain dorothea’s ear:
he ha fascin her attent; he ha evid tri to impress 
mind with the notion that he ha claim beyond anyth i have done 
him. if i die—and he is wait here on the watch for that—he 
persuad her to marri him. that would be calam for her and 
for him. _she_ would not think it calam: he would make her 
anyth; she ha a tendenc to immoder attach which 
inwardli reproach me for not respond to, and alreadi her mind 
occupi with hi fortun. he think of an easi conquest and 
enter into my nest. that i will hinder! such a marriag would 
fatal to dorothea. ha he ever persist in anyth except 
contradict? in knowledg he ha alwai tri to be showi at 
cost. in religion he could be, as long as it suit him, the 
echo of dorothea’s vagari. when wa sciolism ever dissoci 
laxiti? i utterli distrust hi moral, and it is my duti to hinder 
the utmost the fulfil of hi design.”

the arrang made by mr. casaubon on hi marriag left 
measur open to him, but in rumin on them hi mind 
dwelt so much on the probabl of hi own life that the long 
get the nearest possibl calcul had at last overcom hi 
retic, and had determin him to ask lydgat’s opinion as to 
natur of hi ill.

he had mention to dorothea that lydgat wa come by appoint 
half-past three, and in answer to her anxiou question, whether he 
felt ill, repli,—“no, i mere wish to have hi opinion 
some habitu symptom. you need not see him, my dear. i shall 
order that he mai be sent to me in the yew-tree walk, where i shall 
take my usual exercis.”

when lydgat enter the yew-tree walk he saw mr. casaubon 
reced with hi hand behind him accord to hi habit, and hi 
bent forward. it wa a love afternoon; the leav from the 
lime were fall silent across the sombr evergreen, while 
light and shadow slept side by side: there wa no sound but 
caw of the rook, which to the accustom ear is a lullabi, or 
last solemn lullabi, a dirg. lydgat, consciou of an energet 
in it prime, felt some compass when the figur which he wa 
soon to overtak turn round, and in advanc toward him show 
markedli than ever the sign of prematur ag—the student’s 
shoulder, the emaci limb, and the melancholi line of the mouth.
“poor fellow,” he thought, “some men with hi year ar like lion; 
can tell noth of their ag except that thei ar full grown.”

“mr. lydgat,” said mr. casaubon, with hi invari polit air, “i 
exceedingli oblig to you for your punctual. we will, if 
pleas, carri on our convers in walk to and fro.”

“i hope your wish to see me is not due to the return of 
symptom,” said lydgat, fill up a paus.

“not immedi—no. in order to account for that wish i 
mention—what it were otherwis needless to refer to—that my life, 
all collater account insignific, deriv a possibl 
from the incomplet of labor which have extend through all 
best year. in short, i have long had on hand a work which i would 
leav behind me in such a state, at least, that it might be 
to the press by—other. were i assur that thi is the utmost i 
reason expect, that assur would be a us circumscript 
my attempt, and a guid in both the posit and 
determin of my cours.”

here mr. casaubon paus, remov on hand from hi back and thrust 
between the button of hi singl-breast coat. to a mind 
instruct in the human destini hardli anyth could be 
interest than the inward conflict impli in hi formal 
address, deliv with the usual sing-song and motion of the head.
nai, ar there mani situat more sublim tragic than the 
of the soul with the demand to renounc a work which ha been all 
signific of it life—a signific which is to vanish as 
water which come and go where no man ha need of them? but there 
noth to strike other as sublim about mr. casaubon, and lydgat,
who had some contempt at hand for futil scholarship, felt a 
amus mingl with hi piti. he wa at present too ill 
with disast to enter into the patho of a lot where everyth 
below the level of tragedi except the passion egoism of 
suffer.

“you refer to the possibl hindranc from want of health?” he said,
wish to help forward mr. casaubon’s purpos, which seem to 
clog by some hesit.

“i do. you have not impli to me that the symptom which—i am bound 
testifi—you watch with scrupul care, were those of a 
diseas. but were it so, mr. lydgat, i should desir to know the 
without reserv, and i appeal to you for an exact statement of 
conclus: i request it as a friendli servic. if you can tell 
that my life is not threaten by anyth els than 
casualti, i shall rejoic, on ground which i have alreadi indic.
if not, knowledg of the truth is even more import to me.”

“then i can no longer hesit as to my cours,” said lydgat; “but 
first thing i must impress on you is that my conclus ar 
uncertain—uncertain not onli becaus of my fallibl, but 
diseas of the heart ar emin difficult to found predict on.
in ani case, on can hardli increas appreci the 
uncertainti of life.”

mr. casaubon winc percept, but bow.

“i believ that you ar suffer from what is call 
degener of the heart, a diseas which wa first divin 
explor by laennec, the man who gave us the stethoscop, not so 
mani year ago. a good deal of experi—a more 
observ—is want on the subject. but after what you have said, 
is my duti to tell you that death from thi diseas is often sudden. 
the same time, no such result can be predict. your condit mai 
consist with a toler comfort life for anoth fifteen year,
or even more. i could add no inform to thi beyond anatom 
medic detail, which would leav expect at precis the 
point.” lydgat’s instinct wa fine enough to tell him that 
speech, quit free from ostentati caution, would be felt by mr.
casaubon as a tribut of respect.

“i thank you, mr. lydgat,” said mr. casaubon, after a moment’s paus.
“on thing more i have still to ask: did you commun what you 
now told me to mr. casaubon?”

“partli—i mean, as to the possibl issu.” lydgat wa go 
explain why he had told dorothea, but mr. casaubon, with 
unmistak desir to end the convers, wave hi hand slightli,
and said again, “i thank you,” proceed to remark on the rare 
of the dai.

lydgat, certain that hi patient wish to be alon, soon left him;
and the black figur with hand behind and head bent forward 
to pace the walk where the dark yew-tree gave him a mute 
in melancholi, and the littl shadow of bird or leaf that 
across the isl of sunlight, stole along in silenc as in the 
of a sorrow. here wa a man who now for the first time found 
look into the ey of death—who wa pass through on of 
rare moment of experi when we feel the truth of a commonplac,
which is as differ from what we call know it, as the vision 
water upon the earth is differ from the deliri vision of 
water which cannot be had to cool the burn tongu. when 
commonplac “we must all die” transform itself suddenli into the 
conscious “i must die—and soon,” then death grappl us, and 
finger ar cruel; afterward, he mai come to fold us in hi arm 
our mother did, and our last moment of dim earthli discern mai 
like the first. to mr. casaubon now, it wa as if he suddenli 
himself on the dark river-brink and heard the plash of the 
oar, not discern the form, but expect the summon. in such 
hour the mind doe not chang it lifelong bia, but carri it 
in imagin to the other side of death, gaze backward—perhap 
the divin calm of benefic, perhap with the petti anxieti 
self-assert. what wa mr. casaubon’s bia hi act will give us 
clew to. he held himself to be, with some privat 
reserv, a believ christian, as to estim of the present 
hope of the futur. but what we strive to gratifi, though we mai 
it a distant hope, is an immedi desir: the futur estat for 
men drudg up citi allei exist alreadi in their imagin and love.
and mr. casaubon’s immedi desir wa not for divin communion 
light divest of earthli condit; hi passion long, 
man, clung low and mist-like in veri shadi place.

dorothea had been awar when lydgat had ridden awai, and she 
step into the garden, with the impuls to go at onc to her husband.
but she hesit, fear to offend him by obtrud herself; for 
ardor, continu repuls, serv, with her intens memori, 
heighten her dread, as thwart energi subsid into a shudder; and 
wander slowli round the nearer clump of tree until she saw 
advanc. then she went toward him, and might have repres 
heaven-sent angel come with a promis that the short hour 
should yet be fill with that faith love which cling the closer 
a comprehend grief. hi glanc in repli to her wa so chill that 
felt her timid increas; yet she turn and pass her hand 
hi arm.

mr. casaubon kept hi hand behind him and allow her pliant arm 
cling with difficulti against hi rigid arm.

there wa someth horribl to dorothea in the sensat which 
unrespons hard inflict on her. that is a strong word, but 
too strong: it is in these act call trivial that the seed 
joi ar forev wast, until men and women look round with 
face at the devast their own wast ha made, and sai, the 
bear no harvest of sweet—call their denial knowledg. you 
ask why, in the name of manli, mr. casaubon should have behav 
that wai. consid that hi wa a mind which shrank from piti: have 
ever watch in such a mind the effect of a suspicion that what 
press it as a grief mai be realli a sourc of content, 
actual or futur, to the be who alreadi offend by piti? besid,
he knew littl of dorothea’s sensat, and had not reflect that 
such an occas as the present thei were compar in strength to 
own sensibl about carp’s critic.

dorothea did not withdraw her arm, but she could not ventur to speak.
mr. casaubon did not sai, “i wish to be alon,” but he direct 
step in silenc toward the hous, and as thei enter by the 
door on thi eastern side, dorothea withdrew her arm and linger 
the mat, that she might leav her husband quit free. he 
the librari and shut himself in, alon with hi sorrow.

she went up to her boudoir. the open bow-window let in the seren 
of the afternoon ly in the avenu, where the lime-tree cast 
shadow. but dorothea knew noth of the scene. she threw herself on 
chair, not heed that she wa in the dazzl sun-rai: if there 
discomfort in that, how could she tell that it wa not part of 
inward miseri?

she wa in the reaction of a rebelli anger stronger than ani she 
felt sinc her marriag. instead of tear there came word:—

“what have i done—what am i—that he should treat me so? he never 
what is in my mind—he never care. what is the us of anyth i do? 
wish he had never marri me.”

she began to hear herself, and wa check into still. like on 
ha lost hi wai and is weari, she sat and saw as in on glanc all 
path of her young hope which she should never find again. and just 
clearli in the miser light she saw her own and her husband’
solitud—how thei walk apart so that she wa oblig to survei him.
if he had drawn her toward him, she would never have 
him—never have said, “is he worth live for?” but would have felt 
simpli a part of her own life. now she said bitterli, “it is hi fault,
not mine.” in the jar of her whole be, piti wa overthrown. wa 
her fault that she had believ in him—had believ in 
worthi?—and what, exactli, wa he?— she wa abl enough to 
him—she who wait on hi glanc with trembl, and shut her 
soul in prison, pai it onli hidden visit, that she might be 
enough to pleas him. in such a crisi as thi, some women begin 
hate.

the sun wa low when dorothea wa think that she would not go 
again, but would send a messag to her husband sai that she wa 
well and prefer remain up-stair. she had never 
allow her resent to govern her in thi wai befor, but 
believ now that she could not see him again without tell him 
truth about her feel, and she must wait till she could do it 
interrupt. he might wonder and be hurt at her messag. it wa 
that he should wonder and be hurt. her anger said, as anger is apt 
sai, that god wa with her—that all heaven, though it were crowd 
spirit watch them, must be on her side. she had determin to 
her bell, when there came a rap at the door.

mr. casaubon had sent to sai that he would have hi dinner in 
librari. he wish to be quit alon thi even, be much occupi.

“i shall not dine, then, tantripp.”

“oh, madam, let me bring you a littl someth?”

“no; i am not well. get everyth readi in my dress room, but 
do not disturb me again.”

dorothea sat almost motionless in her medit struggl, while 
even slowli deepen into night. but the struggl 
continu, as that of a man who begin with a movement 
strike and end with conquer hi desir to strike. the energi 
would anim a crime is not more than is want to inspir a 
submiss, when the nobl habit of the soul reassert itself. 
thought with which dorothea had gone out to meet her husband—
convict that he had been ask about the possibl arrest of all 
work, and that the answer must have wrung hi heart, could not be 
without rise besid the imag of him, like a shadowi monitor 
at her anger with sad remonstr. it cost her a litani of 
sorrow and of silent cri that she might be the merci for 
sorrow—but the resolv submiss did come; and when the hous 
still, and she knew that it wa near the time when mr. 
habitu went to rest, she open her door gentli and stood 
in the dark wait for hi come up-stair with a light in 
hand. if he did not come soon she thought that she would go down 
even risk incur anoth pang. she would never again expect 
els. but she did hear the librari door open, and slowli the 
advanc up the staircas without nois from the footstep on 
carpet. when her husband stood opposit to her, she saw that hi 
wa more haggard. he start slightli on see her, and she look 
at him beseechingli, without speak.

“dorothea!” he said, with a gentl surpris in hi tone. “were 
wait for me?”

“ye, i did not like to disturb you.”

“come, my dear, come. you ar young, and need not to extend your 
by watch.”

when the kind quiet melancholi of that speech fell on dorothea’s ear,
she felt someth like the thank that might well up in us if 
had narrowli escap hurt a lame creatur. she put her hand 
her husband’s, and thei went along the broad corridor togeth.




book v.
the dead hand.




chapter xliii.

“thi figur hath high price: ’t wa wrought with 
ag ago in finest ivori;
nought modish in it, pure and nobl 
of gener womanhood that fit all 
that too is costli ware; 
of deft design, to pleas a lordli ey:
the smile, you see, is perfect—
as mere faienc! a tabl 
to suit the richest mount.”


dorothea seldom left home without her husband, but she did 
drive into middlemarch alon, on littl errand of shop or 
such as occur to everi ladi of ani wealth when she live within 
mile of a town. two dai after that scene in the yew-tree walk, 
determin to us such an opportun in order if possibl to 
lydgat, and learn from him whether her husband had realli felt 
depress chang of symptom which he wa conceal from her, 
whether he had insist on know the utmost about himself. she 
almost guilti in ask for knowledg about him from anoth, but 
dread of be without it—the dread of that ignor which would 
her unjust or hard—overcam everi scrupl. that there had been 
crisi in her husband’s mind she wa certain: he had the veri next 
begun a new method of arrang hi note, and had associ her 
newli in carri out hi plan. poor dorothea need to lai up 
of patienc.

it wa about four o’clock when she drove to lydgat’s hous in 
gate, wish, in her immedi doubt of find him at home, that 
had written beforehand. and he wa not at home.

“is mr. lydgat at home?” said dorothea, who had never, that she 
of, seen rosamond, but now rememb the fact of the marriag. ye,
mr. lydgat wa at home.

“i will go in and speak to her, if she will allow me. will you ask 
if she can see me—see mr. casaubon, for a few minut?”

when the servant had gone to deliv that messag, dorothea could 
sound of music through an open window—a few note from a man’s 
and then a piano burst into roulad. but the roulad broke 
suddenli, and then the servant came back sai that mr. lydgat 
be happi to see mr. casaubon.

when the draw-room door open and dorothea enter, there wa 
sort of contrast not infrequ in countri life when the habit of 
differ rank were less blent than now. let those who know, tell 
exactli what stuff it wa that dorothea wore in those dai of 
autumn—that thin white woollen stuff soft to the touch and soft to 
ey. it alwai seem to have been late wash, and to smell of 
sweet hedg—wa alwai in the shape of a peliss with sleev 
all out of the fashion. yet if she had enter befor a still 
as imogen or cato’s daughter, the dress might have seem 
enough: the grace and digniti were in her limb and neck; and about 
simpli part hair and candid ey the larg round poke which wa 
in the fate of women, seem no more odd as a head-dress than the 
trencher we call a halo. by the present audienc of two person, 
dramat heroin could have been expect with more interest than mr.
casaubon. to rosamond she wa on of those counti divin not 
with middlemarch mortal, whose slightest mark of manner 
appear were worthi of her studi; moreov, rosamond wa not 
satisfact that mr. casaubon should have an opportun of 
_her_. what is the us of be exquisit if you ar not seen by 
best judg? and sinc rosamond had receiv the highest compliment 
sir godwin lydgat’s, she felt quit confid of the impress 
must make on peopl of good birth. dorothea put out her hand with 
usual simpl kind, and look admiringli at lydgat’s 
bride—awar that there wa a gentleman stand at a distanc, 
see him mere as a coat figur at a wide angl. the gentleman 
too much occupi with the presenc of the on woman to reflect on 
contrast between the two—a contrast that would certainli have 
strike to a calm observ. thei were both tall, and their ey 
on a level; but imagin rosamond’s infantin blond and 
crown of hair-plait, with her pale-blue dress of a fit and fashion 
perfect that no dressmak could look at it without emot, a 
embroid collar which it wa to be hope all behold would 
the price of, her small hand duli set off with ring, and 
control self-conscious of manner which is the 
substitut for simplic.

“thank you veri much for allow me to interrupt you,” said dorothea,
immedi. “i am anxiou to see mr. lydgat, if possibl, befor i 
home, and i hope that you might possibl tell me where i could 
him, or even allow me to wait for him, if you expect him soon.”

“he is at the new hospit,” said rosamond; “i am not sure how soon 
will come home. but i can send for him.”

“will you let me go and fetch him?” said will ladislaw, come forward.
he had alreadi taken up hi hat befor dorothea enter. she 
with surpris, but put out her hand with a smile of 
pleasur, sai—

“i did not know it wa you: i had no thought of see you here.”

“mai i go to the hospit and tell mr. lydgat that you wish to 
him?” said will.

“it would be quicker to send the carriag for him,” said dorothea, “
you will be kind enough to give the messag to the coachman.”

will wa move to the door when dorothea, whose mind had flash in 
instant over mani connect memori, turn quickli and said, “i 
go myself, thank you. i wish to lose no time befor get home again.
i will drive to the hospit and see mr. lydgat there. prai excus me,
mr. lydgat. i am veri much oblig to you.”

her mind wa evid arrest by some sudden thought, and she 
the room hardli consciou of what wa immedi around her—
consciou that will open the door for her and offer her hi arm 
lead her to the carriag. she took the arm but said noth. will 
feel rather vex and miser, and found noth to sai on 
side. he hand her into the carriag in silenc, thei said good-by,
and dorothea drove awai.

in the five minut’ drive to the hospit she had time for 
reflect that were quit new to her. her decis to go, and 
preoccup in leav the room, had come from the sudden sens 
there would be a sort of decept in her voluntarili allow 
further intercours between herself and will which she wa unabl 
mention to her husband, and alreadi her errand in seek lydgat wa 
matter of conceal. that wa all that had been explicitli in 
mind; but she had been urg also by a vagu discomfort. now that 
wa alon in her drive, she heard the note of the man’s voic and 
accompani piano, which she had not note much at the time, 
on her inward sens; and she found herself think with some 
that will ladislaw wa pass hi time with mr. lydgat in 
husband’s absenc. and then she could not help rememb that he 
pass some time with her under like circumst, so why should 
be ani unfit in the fact? but will wa mr. casaubon’s rel, 
on toward whom she wa bound to show kind. still there had 
sign which perhap she ought to have understood as impli that mr.
casaubon did not like hi cousin’s visit dure hi own absenc.
“perhap i have been mistaken in mani thing,” said poor dorothea 
herself, while the tear came roll and she had to dry them quickli.
she felt confusedli unhappi, and the imag of will which had been 
clear to her befor wa mysteri spoil. but the carriag 
at the gate of the hospit. she wa soon walk round the grass 
with lydgat, and her feel recov the strong bent which had 
her seek for thi interview.

will ladislaw, meanwhil, wa mortifi, and knew the reason of 
clearli enough. hi chanc of meet dorothea were rare; and here 
the first time there had come a chanc which had set him at 
disadvantag. it wa not onli, as it had been hitherto, that she 
not suprem occupi with him, but that she had seen him 
circumst in which he might appear not to be suprem 
with her. he felt thrust to a new distanc from her, amongst 
circl of middlemarch who made no part of her life. but that 
not hi fault: of cours, sinc he had taken hi lodg in the town,
he had been make as mani acquaint as he could, hi 
requir that he should know everybodi and everyth. lydgat 
realli better worth know than ani on els in the neighborhood, 
he happen to have a wife who wa music and altogeth worth 
upon. here wa the whole histori of the situat in which diana 
descend too unexpectedli on her worshipp. it wa mortifi. 
wa consciou that he should not have been at middlemarch but 
dorothea; and yet hi posit there wa threaten to divid him 
her with those barrier of habitu sentiment which ar more fatal 
the persist of mutual interest than all the distanc between 
and britain. prejudic about rank and statu were easi enough to 
in the form of a tyrann letter from mr. casaubon; but prejudic,
like odor bodi, have a doubl exist both solid 
subtl—solid as the pyramid, subtl as the twentieth echo of an echo,
or as the memori of hyacinth which onc scent the dark. and 
wa of a tempera to feel keenli the presenc of subtleti: a 
of clumsier percept would not have felt, as he did, that for 
first time some sens of unfit in perfect freedom with him 
sprung up in dorothea’s mind, and that their silenc, as he 
her to the carriag, had had a chill in it. perhap casaubon, in 
hatr and jealousi, had been insist to dorothea that will had 
below her social. confound casaubon!

will re-enter the draw-room, took up hi hat, and 
irrit as he advanc toward mr. lydgat, who had seat 
at her work-tabl, said—

“it is alwai fatal to have music or poetri interrupt. mai i 
anoth dai and just finish about the render of ‘lungi dal 
bene’?”

“i shall be happi to be taught,” said rosamond. “but i am sure 
admit that the interrupt wa a veri beauti on. i quit envi 
acquaint with mr. casaubon. is she veri clever? she look as 
she were.”

“realli, i never thought about it,” said will, sulkili.

“that is just the answer tertiu gave me, when i first ask him if 
were handsom. what is it that you gentlemen ar think of when 
ar with mr. casaubon?”

“herself,” said will, not indispos to provok the charm mr.
lydgat. “when on see a perfect woman, on never think of 
attribut—on is consciou of her presenc.”

“i shall be jealou when tertiu goe to lowick,” said rosamond,
dimpl, and speak with aeri light. “he will come back 
think noth of me.”

“that doe not seem to have been the effect on lydgat hitherto. mr.
casaubon is too unlik other women for them to be compar with her.”

“you ar a devout worshipp, i perceiv. you often see her, 
suppos.”

“no,” said will, almost pettishli. “worship is usual a matter 
theori rather than of practic. but i am practis it to excess 
at thi moment—i must realli tear myself awai.”

“prai come again some even: mr. lydgat will like to hear the music,
and i cannot enjoi it so well without him.”

when her husband wa at home again, rosamond said, stand in front 
him and hold hi coat-collar with both her hand, “mr. ladislaw 
here sing with me when mr. casaubon came in. he seem vex. 
you think he dislik her see him at our hous? sure your 
is more than equal to hi—whatev mai be hi relat to 
casaubon.”

“no, no; it must be someth els if he were realli vex. ladislaw 
a sort of gypsi; he think noth of leather and prunella.”

“music apart, he is not alwai veri agreeabl. do you like him?”

“ye: i think he is a good fellow: rather miscellan 
bric-a-brac, but likabl.”

“do you know, i think he ador mr. casaubon.”

“poor devil!” said lydgat, smile and pinch hi wife’s ear.

rosamond felt herself begin to know a great deal of the world,
especi in discov what when she wa in her unmarri 
had been inconceiv to her except as a dim tragedi in by-
costum—that women, even after marriag, might make conquest 
enslav men. at that time young ladi in the countri, even 
educ at mr. lemon’s, read littl french literatur later 
racin, and public print had not cast their present 
illumin over the scandal of life. still, vaniti, with a woman’
whole mind and dai to work in, can construct abundantli on 
hint, especi on such a hint as the possibl of 
conquest. how delight to make captiv from the throne of 
with a husband as crown-princ by your side—himself in fact 
subject—while the captiv look up forev hopeless, lose their 
probabl, and if their appetit too, so much the better! but rosamond’
romanc turn at present chiefli on her crown-princ, and it 
enough to enjoi hi assur subject. when he said, “poor devil!” 
ask, with play curios—

“why so?”

“why, what can a man do when he take to ador on of you mermaid?
he onli neglect hi work and run up bill.”

“i am sure you do not neglect your work. you ar alwai at 
hospit, or see poor patient, or think about some doctor’
quarrel; and then at home you alwai want to pore over your 
and phial. confess you like those thing better than me.”

“haven’t you ambit enough to wish that your husband should 
someth better than a middlemarch doctor?” said lydgat, let 
hand fall on to hi wife’s shoulder, and look at her 
affection graviti. “i shall make you learn my favorit bit from 
old poet—

‘why should our pride make such a stir to 
and be forgot? what good is like to thi,
to do worthi the write, and to 
worthi the read and the world delight?’


what i want, rosi, is to do worthi the write,—and to write out 
what i have done. a man must work, to do that, my pet.”

“of cours, i wish you to make discoveri: no on could more wish 
to attain a high posit in some better place than middlemarch. 
cannot sai that i have ever tri to hinder you from work. but 
cannot live like hermit. you ar not discont with me, tertiu?”

“no, dear, no. i am too entir content.”

“but what did mr. casaubon want to sai to you?”

“mere to ask about her husband’s health. but i think she is go 
be splendid to our new hospit: i think she will give us two 
a-year.”




chapter xliv.

i would not creep along the coast but 
out in mid-sea, by guidanc of the star.


when dorothea, walk round the laurel-plant plot of the 
hospit with lydgat, had learn from him that there were no sign 
chang in mr. casaubon’s bodili condit beyond the mental sign 
anxieti to know the truth about hi ill, she wa silent for a 
moment, wonder whether she had said or done anyth to rous 
new anxieti. lydgat, not will to let slip an opportun 
further a favorit purpos, ventur to sai—

“i don’t know whether your or mr. casaubon’s attent ha been 
to the need of our new hospit. circumst have made it 
rather egotist in me to urg the subject; but that is not my fault:
it is becaus there is a fight be made against it by the 
medic men. i think you ar gener interest in such thing, for 
rememb that when i first had the pleasur of see you at 
grang befor your marriag, you were ask me some question 
the wai in which the health of the poor wa affect by their 
hous.”

“ye, inde,” said dorothea, brighten. “i shall be quit 
to you if you will tell me how i can help to make thing a 
better. everyth of that sort ha slip awai from me sinc i 
been marri. i mean,” she said, after a moment’s hesit, “that 
peopl in our villag ar toler comfort, and my mind ha 
too much taken up for me to inquir further. but here—in such a 
as middlemarch—there must be a great deal to be done.”

“there is everyth to be done,” said lydgat, with abrupt energi.
“and thi hospit is a capit piec of work, due entir to mr.
bulstrod’s exert, and in a great degre to hi monei. but on 
can’t do everyth in a scheme of thi sort. of cours he 
forward to help. and now there’s a mean, petti feud set up against 
thing in the town, by certain person who want to make it a failur.”

“what can be their reason?” said dorothea, with naiv surpris.

“chiefli mr. bulstrod’s unpopular, to begin with. half the 
would almost take troubl for the sake of thwart him. in thi 
world most peopl never consid that a thing is good to be done 
it is done by their own set. i had no connect with bulstrod 
i came here. i look at him quit imparti, and i see that he 
some notion—that he ha set thing on foot—which i can turn to 
public purpos. if a fair number of the better educ men went 
work with the belief that their observ might contribut to 
reform of medic doctrin and practic, we should soon see a 
for the better. that’s my point of view. i hold that by refus 
work with mr. bulstrod i should be turn my back on an 
of make my profess more gener servic.”

“i quit agre with you,” said dorothea, at onc fascin by 
situat sketch in lydgat’s word. “but what is there against mr.
bulstrod? i know that my uncl is friendli with him.”

“peopl don’t like hi religi tone,” said lydgat, break 
there.

“that is all the stronger reason for despis such an opposit,”
said dorothea, look at the affair of middlemarch by the light 
the great persecut.

“to put the matter quit fairli, thei have other object to him:—
is master and rather unsoci, and he is concern with trade,
which ha complaint of it own that i know noth about. but what 
that to do with the question whether it would not be a fine thing 
establish here a more valuabl hospit than ani thei have in 
counti? the immedi motiv to the opposit, howev, is the 
that bulstrod ha put the medic direct into my hand. of cours 
am glad of that. it give me an opportun of do some 
work,—and i am awar that i have to justifi hi choic of me. but 
consequ is, that the whole profess in middlemarch have 
themselv tooth and nail against the hospit, and not onli refus 
cooper themselv, but try to blacken the whole affair and 
subscript.”

“how veri petti!” exclaim dorothea, indignantli.

“i suppos on must expect to fight on’s wai: there is hardli 
to be done without it. and the ignor of peopl about here 
stupend. i don’t lai claim to anyth els than have us 
opportun which have not come within everybodi’s reach; but 
is no stifl the offenc of be young, and a new-comer, 
happen to know someth more than the old inhabit. still, if 
believ that i can set go a better method of treatment—if i 
that i can pursu certain observ and inquiri which mai be 
last benefit to medic practic, i should be a base truckler if 
allow ani consider of person comfort to hinder me. and 
cours is all the clearer from there be no salari in question to 
my persist in an equivoc light.”

“i am glad you have told me thi, mr. lydgat,” said dorothea,
cordial. “i feel sure i can help a littl. i have some monei, 
don’t know what to do with it—that is often an uncomfort thought 
me. i am sure i can spare two hundr a-year for a grand purpos 
thi. how happi you must be, to know thing that you feel sure will 
great good! i wish i could awak with that knowledg everi morn.
there seem to be so much troubl taken that on can hardli see 
good of!”

there wa a melancholi cadenc in dorothea’s voic as she spoke 
last word. but she present ad, more cheerfulli, “prai come 
lowick and tell us more of thi. i will mention the subject to mr.
casaubon. i must hasten home now.”

she did mention it that even, and said that she should like 
subscrib two hundr a-year—she had seven hundr a-year as 
equival of her own fortun, settl on her at her marriag. mr.
casaubon made no object beyond a pass remark that the sum 
be disproportion in relat to other good object, but 
dorothea in her ignor resist that suggest, he acquiesc. 
did not care himself about spend monei, and wa not reluct 
give it. if he ever felt keenli ani question of monei it wa 
the medium of anoth passion than the love of materi properti.

dorothea told him that she had seen lydgat, and recit the gist 
her convers with him about the hospit. mr. casaubon did 
question her further, but he felt sure that she had wish to know 
had pass between lydgat and himself. “she know that i know,” 
the ever-restless voic within; but that increas of tacit 
onli thrust further off ani confid between them. he distrust 
affect; and what loneli is more lone than distrust?




chapter xlv.

it is the humor of mani head to extol the dai of their forefath,
and declaim against the wicked of time present. 
notwithstand thei cannot handsom do, without the borrow 
and satir of time past; condemn the vice of their own time, 
the express of vice in time which thei commend, which cannot 
argu the commun of vice in both. horac, therefor, juven, 
persiu, were no prophet, although their line did seem to 
and point at our time.—sir thoma brown: _pseudodoxia epidemica_.


that opposit to the new fever hospit which lydgat had sketch 
dorothea wa, like other opposit, to be view in mani 
light. he regard it as a mixtur of jealousi and 
prejudic. mr. bulstrod saw in it not onli medic jealousi but 
determin to thwart himself, prompt mainli by a hatr of 
vital religion of which he had striven to be an effectu 
repres—a hatr which certainli found pretext apart 
religion such as were onli too easi to find in the entangl 
human action. these might be call the ministeri view. 
opposit have the illimit rang of object at command, 
need never stop short at the boundari of knowledg, but can 
forev on the vast of ignor. what the opposit in 
said about the new hospit and it administr had certainli 
great deal of echo in it, for heaven ha taken care that 
shall not be an origin; but there were differ 
repres everi social shade between the polish moder of dr.
minchin and the trenchant assert of mr. dollop, the landladi of 
tankard in slaughter lane.

mr. dollop becam more and more convinc by her own assever,
that dr. lydgat meant to let the peopl die in the hospit, if not 
poison them, for the sake of cut them up without sai by 
leav or with your leav; for it wa a known “fac” that he had 
to cut up mr. gobi, as respect a woman as ani in parlei street,
who had monei in trust befor her marriag—a poor tale for a doctor,
who if he wa good for anyth should know what wa the matter 
you befor you di, and not want to pry into your insid after 
were gone. if that wa not reason, mr. dollop wish to know what wa;
but there wa a preval feel in her audienc that her opinion 
a bulwark, and that if it were overthrown there would be no limit 
the cut-up of bodi, as had been well seen in burk and hare 
their pitch-plaister—such a hang busi as that wa not want 
middlemarch!

and let it not be suppos that opinion at the tankard in 
lane wa unimport to the medic profess: that old 
public-hous—the origin tankard, known by the name of dollop’s—
the resort of a great benefit club, which had some month befor put 
the vote whether it long-stand medic man, “doctor gambit,” 
not be cashier in favor of “thi doctor lydgat,” who wa capabl 
perform the most astonish cure, and rescu peopl 
given up by other practition. but the balanc had been 
against lydgat by two member, who for some privat reason held 
thi power of resuscit person as good as dead wa an 
recommend, and might interfer with providenti favor. in 
cours of the year, howev, there had been a chang in the 
sentiment, of which the unanim at dollop’s wa an index.

a good deal more than a year ago, befor anyth wa known 
lydgat’s skill, the judgment on it had natur been divid,
depend on a sens of likelihood, situat perhap in the pit of 
stomach or in the pineal gland, and differ in it verdict, but 
the less valuabl as a guid in the total deficit of evid. 
who had chronic diseas or whose live had long been worn threadbar,
like old featherston’s, had been at onc inclin to try him; also,
mani who did not like pai their doctor’s bill, thought agreeabl 
open an account with a new doctor and send for him without 
if the children’s temper want a dose, occas when the 
practition were often crusti; and all person thu inclin 
emploi lydgat held it like that he wa clever. some consid 
he might do more than other “where there wa liver;”—at least 
would be no harm in get a few bottl of “stuff” from him, sinc 
these prove useless it would still be possibl to return to 
purifi pill, which kept you aliv if thei did not remov 
yellow. but these were peopl of minor import. good 
famili were of cours not go to chang their doctor without 
shown; and everybodi who had emploi mr. peacock did not feel 
to accept a new man mere in the charact of hi successor, 
that he wa “not like to be equal to peacock.”

but lydgat had not been long in the town befor there were 
enough report of him to breed much more specif expect and 
intensifi differ into partisanship; some of the particular 
of that impress order of which the signific is entir hidden,
like a statist amount without a standard of comparison, but with 
note of exclam at the end. the cubic feet of oxygen 
swallow by a full-grown man—what a shudder thei might have creat 
some middlemarch circl! “oxygen! nobodi know what that mai be—is 
ani wonder the cholera ha got to dantzic? and yet there ar peopl 
sai quarantin is no good!”

on of the fact quickli rumor wa that lydgat did not 
drug. thi wa offens both to the physician whose 
distinct seem infring on, and to the surgeon-apothecari 
whom he rang himself; and onli a littl while befor, thei might 
count on have the law on their side against a man who 
call himself a london-made m.d. dare to ask for pai except as 
charg on drug. but lydgat had not been experienc enough to 
that hi new cours would be even more offens to the laiti; and 
mr. mawmsei, an import grocer in the top market, who, though not 
of hi patient, question him in an affabl manner on the subject, 
wa injudici enough to give a hasti popular explan of 
reason, point out to mr. mawmsei that it must lower the 
of practition, and be a constant injuri to the public, if their 
mode of get paid for their work wa by their make out long 
for draught, bolus, and mixtur.

“it is in that wai that hard-work medic men mai come to be 
as mischiev as quack,” said lydgat, rather thoughtlessli. “to 
their own bread thei must overdos the king’s lieg; and that’s a 
sort of treason, mr. mawmsei—undermin the constitut in a 
wai.”

mr. mawmsei wa not onli an overs (it wa about a question 
outdoor pai that he wa have an interview with lydgat), he wa 
asthmat and had an increas famili: thu, from a medic point 
view, as well as from hi own, he wa an import man; inde, 
except grocer, whose hair wa arrang in a flame-like pyramid,
and whose retail defer wa of the cordial, 
kind—jocos complimentari, and with a certain consider 
from let out the full forc of hi mind. it wa mr. mawmsei’
friendli jocos in question him which had set the tone 
lydgat’s repli. but let the wise be warn against too great 
at explan: it multipli the sourc of mistak, lengthen 
sum for reckon sure to go wrong.

lydgat smile as he end hi speech, put hi foot into 
stirrup, and mr. mawmsei laugh more than he would have done if he 
known who the king’s lieg were, give hi “good morn, sir,
good-morn, sir,” with the air of on who saw everyth 
enough. but in truth hi view were perturb. for year he had 
pai bill with strictli made item, so that for everi half-crown 
eighteen-penc he wa certain someth measur had been deliv.
he had done thi with satisfact, includ it among 
respons as a husband and father, and regard a longer 
than usual as a digniti worth mention. moreov, in addit to 
massiv benefit of the drug to “self and famili,” he had enjoi 
pleasur of form an acut judgment as to their immedi effect, 
as to give an intellig statement for the guidanc of mr. gambit—
practition just a littl lower in statu than wrench or toller, 
especi esteem as an accoucheur, of whose abil mr. mawmsei 
the poorest opinion on all other point, but in doctor, he wa 
to sai in an underton, he place gambit abov ani of them.

here were deeper reason than the superfici talk of a new man, 
appear still flimsier in the draw-room over the shop, when 
were recit to mr. mawmsei, a woman accustom to be made much of 
a fertil mother,—gener under attend more or less frequent 
mr. gambit, and occasion have attack which requir dr. minchin.

“doe thi mr. lydgat mean to sai there is no us in take medicin?”
said mr. mawmsei, who wa slightli given to drawl. “i should 
him to tell me how i could bear up at fair time, if i didn’t 
strengthen medicin for a month beforehand. think of what i have 
provid for call custom, my dear!”—here mr. mawmsei turn to 
intim femal friend who sat by—“a larg veal pie—a stuf fillet—
round of beef—ham, tongu, et cetera, et cetera! but what keep me 
best is the pink mixtur, not the brown. i wonder, mr. mawmsei, 
_your_ experi, you could have patienc to listen. i should 
told him at onc that i knew a littl better than that.”

“no, no, no,” said mr. mawmsei; “i wa not go to tell him 
opinion. hear everyth and judg for yourself is my motto. but 
didn’t know who he wa talk to. i wa not to be turn on _hi_
finger. peopl often pretend to tell me thing, when thei might as 
sai, ‘mawmsei, you’re a fool.’ but i smile at it: i humor everybodi’
weak place. if physic had done harm to self and famili, i should 
found it out by thi time.”

the next dai mr. gambit wa told that lydgat went about sai 
wa of no us.

“inde!” said he, lift hi eyebrow with cautiou surpris. (he 
a stout huski man with a larg ring on hi fourth finger.) “how will 
cure hi patient, then?”

“that is what i sai,” return mr. mawmsei, who habitu gave 
to her speech by load her pronoun. “doe _he_ suppos that 
will pai him onli to come and sit with them and go awai again?”

mr. mawmsei had had a great deal of sit from mr. gambit, 
veri full account of hi own habit of bodi and other affair; but 
cours he knew there wa no innuendo in her remark, sinc hi 
time and person narr had never been charg for. so he repli,
humor—

“well, lydgat is a good-look young fellow, you know.”

“not on that _i_ would emploi,” said mr. mawmsei. “_other_ mai do 
thei pleas.”

henc mr. gambit could go awai from the chief grocer’s without fear 
rivalri, but not without a sens that lydgat wa on of 
hypocrit who try to discredit other by advertis their 
honesti, and that it might be worth some peopl’s while to show him up.
mr. gambit, howev, had a satisfactori practic, much pervad by 
smell of retail trade which suggest the reduct of cash 
to a balanc. and he did not think it worth hi while to show 
up until he knew how. he had not inde great resourc of educ,
and had had to work hi own wai against a good deal of 
contempt; but he made none the wors accoucheur for call 
breath apparatu “long.”

other medic men felt themselv more capabl. mr. toller share 
highest practic in the town and belong to an old middlemarch famili:
there were toller in the law and everyth els abov the line 
retail trade. unlik our irasc friend wrench, he had the 
wai in the world of take thing which might be suppos to annoi him,
be a well-bred, quietli faceti man, who kept a good hous, 
veri fond of a littl sport when he could get it, veri friendli 
mr. hawlei, and hostil to mr. bulstrod. it mai seem odd that 
such pleasant habit he should have been given to the heroic treatment,
bleed and blister and starv hi patient, with a 
disregard to hi person exampl; but the incongru favor 
opinion of hi abil among hi patient, who commonli observ 
mr. toller had lazi manner, but hi treatment wa as activ as 
could desir: no man, said thei, carri more serious into 
profess: he wa a littl slow in come, but when he came, he _did_
someth. he wa a great favorit in hi own circl, and whatev 
impli to ani on’s disadvantag told doubli from hi 
iron tone.

he natur got tire of smile and sai, “ah!” when he wa 
that mr. peacock’s successor did not mean to dispens medicin; 
mr. hackbutt on dai mention it over the wine at a dinner-parti, mr.
toller said, laughingli, “dibbitt will get rid of hi stale drug,
then. i’m fond of littl dibbitt—i’m glad he’s in luck.”

“i see your mean, toller,” said mr. hackbutt, “and i am entir 
your opinion. i shall take an opportun of express myself to 
effect. a medic man should be respons for the qualiti of 
drug consum by hi patient. that is the rational of the system 
charg which ha hitherto obtain; and noth is more 
than thi ostent of reform, where there is no real amelior.”

“ostent, hackbutt?” said mr. toller, iron. “i don’t 
that. a man can’t veri well be ostentati of what nobodi believ in.
there’s no reform in the matter: the question is, whether the profit 
the drug is paid to the medic man by the druggist or by the patient,
and whether there shall be extra pai under the name of attend.”

“ah, to be sure; on of your damn new version of old humbug,” 
mr. hawlei, pass the decant to mr. wrench.

mr. wrench, gener abstemi, often drank wine rather freeli at 
parti, get the more irrit in consequ.

“as to humbug, hawlei,” he said, “that’s a word easi to fling about.
but what i contend against is the wai medic men ar foul their 
nest, and set up a cry about the countri as if a 
practition who dispens drug couldn’t be a gentleman. i throw 
the imput with scorn. i sai, the most ungentlemanli trick a 
can be guilti of is to come among the member of hi profess 
innov which ar a libel on their time-honor procedur. that 
my opinion, and i am readi to maintain it against ani on 
contradict me.” mr. wrench’s voic had becom exceedingli sharp.

“i can’t oblig you there, wrench,” said mr. hawlei, thrust 
hand into hi trouser-pocket.

“my dear fellow,” said mr. toller, strike in pacif, and 
at mr. wrench, “the physician have their toe trodden on more than 
have. if you come to digniti it is a question for minchin and spragu.”

“doe medic jurisprud provid noth against 
infring?” said mr. hackbutt, with a disinterest desir to 
hi light. “how doe the law stand, eh, hawlei?”

“noth to be done there,” said mr. hawlei. “i look into it 
spragu. you’d onli break your nose against a damn judg’s decis.”

“pooh! no need of law,” said mr. toller. “so far as practic 
concern the attempt is an absurd. no patient will 
it—certainli not peacock’s, who have been us to deplet. pass 
wine.”

mr. toller’s predict wa partli verifi. if mr. and mr. mawmsei,
who had no idea of emploi lydgat, were made uneasi by hi 
declar against drug, it wa inevit that those who call 
in should watch a littl anxious to see whether he did “us all 
mean he might us” in the case. even good mr. powderel, who in 
constant chariti of interpret wa inclin to esteem lydgat 
more for what seem a conscienti pursuit of a better plan, had 
mind disturb with doubt dure hi wife’s attack of erysipela, 
could not abstain from mention to lydgat that mr. peacock on 
similar occas had administ a seri of bolus which were 
otherwis defin than by their remark effect in bring mr.
powderel round befor michaelma from an ill which had begun in 
remark hot august. at last, inde, in the conflict between 
desir not to hurt lydgat and hi anxieti that no “mean” should 
lack, he induc hi wife privat to take widgeon’s 
pill, an esteem middlemarch medicin, which arrest everi 
at the fountain by set to work at onc upon the blood. 
co-oper measur wa not to be mention to lydgat, and mr.
powderel himself had no certain relianc on it, onli hope that 
might be attend with a bless.

but in thi doubt stage of lydgat’s introduct he wa help 
what we mortal rashli call good fortun. i suppos no doctor ever 
newli to a place without make cure that surpris somebodi—
which mai be call fortun’s testimoni, and deserv as much 
as the written or print kind. variou patient got well while 
wa attend them, some even of danger ill; and it 
remark that the new doctor with hi new wai had at least the 
of bring peopl back from the brink of death. the trash talk 
such occas wa the more vexati to lydgat, becaus it 
precis the sort of prestig which an incompet and 
man would desir, and wa sure to be imput to him by the 
dislik of the other medic men as an encourag on hi own part 
ignor puf. but even hi proud outspoken wa check by 
discern that it wa as useless to fight against the 
of ignor as to whip the fog; and “good fortun” insist on 
those interpret.

mr. larcher have just becom charit concern about 
symptom in her charwoman, when dr. minchin call, ask him to 
her then and there, and to give her a certif for the infirmari;
whereupon after examin he wrote a statement of the case as on 
tumor, and recommend the bearer nanci nash as an out-patient. nanci,
call at home on her wai to the infirmari, allow the stai maker 
hi wife, in whose attic she lodg, to read dr. minchin’s paper, 
by thi mean becam a subject of compassion convers in 
neighbor shop of churchyard lane as be afflict with a tumor 
first declar to be as larg and hard as a duck’s egg, but later 
the dai to be about the size of “your fist.” most hearer agre 
it would have to be cut out, but on had known of oil and anoth 
“squitchin” as adequ to soften and reduc ani lump in the 
when taken enough of into the insid—the oil by gradual “soopl,”
the squitchin by eat awai.

meanwhil when nanci present herself at the infirmari, it happen 
be on of lydgat’s dai there. after question and examin her,
lydgat said to the hous-surgeon in an underton, “it’s not tumor:
it’s cramp.” he order her a blister and some steel mixtur, and 
her to go home and rest, give her at the same time a note to mr.
larcher, who, she said, wa her best employ, to testifi that she 
in need of good food.

but by-and-by nanci, in her attic, becam portent wors, 
suppos tumor have inde given wai to the blister, but 
wander to anoth region with angrier pain. the staymak’s wife 
to fetch lydgat, and he continu for a fortnight to attend nanci 
her own home, until under hi treatment she got quit well and went 
work again. but the case continu to be describ as on of tumor 
churchyard lane and other street—nai, by mr. larcher also; for 
lydgat’s remark cure wa mention to dr. minchin, he 
did not like to sai, “the case wa not on of tumor, and i wa 
in describ it as such,” but answer, “inde! ah! i saw it wa 
surgic case, not of a fatal kind.” he had been inwardli annoi,
howev, when he had ask at the infirmari about the woman he 
recommend two dai befor, to hear from the hous-surgeon, 
youngster who wa not sorri to vex minchin with impun, exactli 
had occur: he privat pronounc that it wa indec in a 
practition to contradict a physician’s diagnosi in that open manner,
and afterward agre with wrench that lydgat wa 
inattent to etiquett. lydgat did not make the affair a ground 
valu himself or (veri particularli) despis minchin, 
rectif of misjudg often happen among men of 
qualif. but report took up thi amaz case of tumor, 
clearli distinguish from cancer, and consid the more aw 
be of the wander sort; till much prejudic against lydgat’
method as to drug wa overcom by the proof of hi marvel skill 
the speedi restor of nanci nash after she had been roll 
roll in agoni from the presenc of a tumor both hard 
obstin, but nevertheless compel to yield.

how could lydgat help himself? it is offens to tell a ladi when 
is express her amaz at your skill, that she is 
mistaken and rather foolish in her amaz. and to have enter 
the natur of diseas would onli have ad to hi breach of 
proprieti. thu he had to winc under a promis of success given 
that ignor prais which miss everi valid qualiti.

in the case of a more conspicu patient, mr. borthrop trumbul,
lydgat wa consciou of have shown himself someth better than 
everi-dai doctor, though here too it wa an equivoc advantag that 
won. the eloqu auction wa seiz with pneumonia, and have 
a patient of mr. peacock’s, sent for lydgat, whom he had express 
intent to patron. mr trumbul wa a robust man, a good 
for try the expect theori upon—watch the cours of 
interest diseas when left as much as possibl to itself, so 
the stage might be note for futur guidanc; and from the air 
which he describ hi sensat lydgat surmis that he would 
to be taken into hi medic man’s confid, and be repres as 
partner in hi own cure. the auction heard, without much surpris,
that hi wa a constitut which (alwai with due watch) might 
left to itself, so as to offer a beauti exampl of a diseas 
all it phase seen in clear delin, and that he probabl had 
rare strength of mind voluntarili to becom the test of a 
procedur, and thu make the disord of hi pulmonari function 
gener benefit to societi.

mr. trumbul acquiesc at onc, and enter strongli into the 
that an ill of hi wa no ordinari occas for medic scienc.

“never fear, sir; you ar not speak to on who is 
ignor of the _vi medicatrix_,” said he, with hi usual 
of express, made rather pathet by difficulti of breath. and 
went without shrink through hi abstin from drug, 
sustain by applic of the thermomet which impli 
import of hi temperatur, by the sens that he furnish 
for the microscop, and by learn mani new word which seem 
to the digniti of hi secret. for lydgat wa acut enough 
indulg him with a littl technic talk.

it mai be imagin that mr. trumbul rose from hi couch with 
disposit to speak of an ill in which he had manifest 
strength of hi mind as well as constitut; and he wa not 
in award credit to the medic man who had discern the qualiti 
patient he had to deal with. the auction wa not an ungener man,
and like to give other their due, feel that he could afford it. 
had caught the word “expect method,” and rang chime on thi 
other learn phrase to accompani the assur that lydgat “knew 
thing or two more than the rest of the doctor—wa far better vers 
the secret of hi profess than the major of hi compeer.”

thi had happen befor the affair of fred vinci’s ill had 
to mr. wrench’s enmiti toward lydgat more definit person ground.
the new-comer alreadi threaten to be a nuisanc in the shape 
rivalri, and wa certainli a nuisanc in the shape of 
critic or reflect on hi hard-driven elder, who had 
someth els to do than to busi themselv with untri notion. 
practic had spread in on or two quarter, and from the first 
report of hi high famili had led to hi be pretti 
invit, so that the other medic men had to meet him at dinner in 
best hous; and have to meet a man whom you dislik is not 
alwai to end in a mutual attach. there wa hardli ever so 
unanim among them as in the opinion that lydgat wa an 
young fellow, and yet readi for the sake of ultim predomin 
show a crawl subservi to bulstrod. that mr. farebroth, 
name wa a chief flag of the anti-bulstrod parti, alwai 
lydgat and made a friend of him, wa refer to farebroth’
unaccount wai of fight on both side.

here wa plenti of prepar for the outburst of profession 
at the announc of the law mr. bulstrod wa lai down for 
direct of the new hospit, which were the more exasper 
there wa no present possibl of interf with hi will 
pleasur, everybodi except lord medlicot have refus help 
the build, on the ground that thei prefer give to the 
infirmari. mr. bulstrod met all the expens, and had ceas to 
sorri that he wa purchas the right to carri out hi notion 
improv without hindranc from prejud coadjutor; but he 
had to spend larg sum, and the build had linger. caleb garth 
undertaken it, had fail dure it progress, and befor the 
fit were begun had retir from the manag of the busi;
and when refer to the hospit he often said that howev 
might ring if you tri him, he like good solid carpentri and masonri,
and had a notion both of drain and chimnei. in fact, the hospit 
becom an object of intens interest to bulstrod, and he 
willingli have continu to spare a larg yearli sum that he might 
it dictatori without ani board; but he had anoth favorit 
which also requir monei for it accomplish: he wish to bui 
land in the neighborhood of middlemarch, and therefor he wish to 
consider contribut toward maintain the hospit. 
he frame hi plan of manag. the hospit wa to be reserv 
fever in all it form; lydgat wa to be chief medic superintend,
that he might have free author to pursu all 
investig which hi studi, particularli in pari, had shown 
the import of, the other medic visitor have a 
influenc, but no power to contraven lydgat’s ultim decis; 
the gener manag wa to be lodg exclus in the hand 
five director associ with mr. bulstrod, who were to have vote 
the ratio of their contribut, the board itself fill up 
vacanc in it number, and no mob of small contributor be 
to a share of govern.

there wa an immedi refus on the part of everi medic man in 
town to becom a visitor at the fever hospit.

“veri well,” said lydgat to mr. bulstrod, “we have a 
hous-surgeon and dispens, a clear-head, neat-hand fellow; we’
get webb from crabslei, as good a countri practition as ani of them,
to come over twice a-week, and in case of ani except oper,
prothero will come from brass. i must work the harder, that’s all,
and i have given up my post at the infirmari. the plan will flourish 
spite of them, and then thei’ll be glad to come in. thing can’t 
as thei ar: there must be all sort of reform soon, and then 
fellow mai be glad to come and studi here.” lydgat wa in 
spirit.

“i shall not flinch, you mai depend upon it, mr. lydgat,” said mr.
bulstrod. “while i see you carri out high intent with vigor,
you shall have my unfail support. and i have humbl confid 
the bless which ha hitherto attend my effort against the 
of evil in thi town will not be withdrawn. suitabl director 
assist me i have no doubt of secur. mr. brook of tipton ha 
given me hi concurr, and a pledg to contribut yearli: he ha 
specifi the sum—probabl not a great on. but he will be a 
member of the board.”

a us member wa perhap to be defin as on who would 
noth, and alwai vote with mr. bulstrod.

the medic avers to lydgat wa hardli disguis now. neither dr.
spragu nor dr. minchin said that he dislik lydgat’s knowledg, 
hi disposit to improv treatment: what thei dislik wa 
arrog, which nobodi felt to be altogeth deniabl. thei 
that he wa insol, pretenti, and given to that 
innov for the sake of nois and show which wa the essenc of 
charlatan.

the word charlatan onc thrown on the air could not be let drop. 
those dai the world wa agit about the wondrou do of mr. st.
john long, “noblemen and gentlemen” attest hi extract of a 
like mercuri from the templ of a patient.

mr. toller remark on dai, smilingli, to mr. taft, that “
had found a man to suit him in lydgat; a charlatan in religion is 
to like other sort of charlatan.”

“ye, inde, i can imagin,” said mr. taft, keep the number 
thirti stitch carefulli in her mind all the while; “there ar so 
of that sort. i rememb mr. cheshir, with hi iron, try to 
peopl straight when the almighti had made them crook.”

“no, no,” said mr. toller, “cheshir wa all right—all fair and 
board. but there’s st. john long—that’s the kind of fellow we call 
charlatan, advertis cure in wai nobodi know anyth about: 
fellow who want to make a nois by pretend to go deeper than 
peopl. the other dai he wa pretend to tap a man’s brain and 
quicksilv out of it.”

“good graciou! what dread trifl with peopl’s constitut!”
said mr. taft.

after thi, it came to be held in variou quarter that lydgat 
even with respect constitut for hi own purpos, and how 
more like that in hi flighti experi he should make six 
seven of hospit patient. especi it wa to be expect, as 
landladi of the tankard had said, that he would recklessli cut up 
dead bodi. for lydgat have attend mr. gobi, who di 
of a heart-diseas not veri clearli express in the symptom, 
daringli ask leav of her rel to open the bodi, and thu 
an offenc quickli spread beyond parlei street, where that ladi 
long resid on an incom such as made thi associ of her 
with the victim of burk and hare a flagrant insult to her memori.

affair were in thi stage when lydgat open the subject of 
hospit to dorothea. we see that he wa bear enmiti and 
misconcept with much spirit, awar that thei were partli creat 
hi good share of success.

“thei will not drive me awai,” he said, talk confidenti in mr.
farebroth’s studi. “i have got a good opportun here, for the 
i care most about; and i am pretti sure to get incom enough for 
want. by-and-by i shall go on as quietli as possibl: i have 
seduct now awai from home and work. and i am more and 
convinc that it will be possibl to demonstr the 
origin of all the tissu. raspail and other ar on the same track,
and i have been lose time.”

“i have no power of propheci there,” said mr. farebroth, who had 
puf at hi pipe thoughtfulli while lydgat talk; “but as to 
hostil in the town, you’ll weather it if you ar prudent.”

“how am i to be prudent?” said lydgat, “i just do what come befor 
to do. i can’t help peopl’s ignor and spite, ani more 
vesaliu could. it isn’t possibl to squar on’s conduct to 
conclus which nobodi can forese.”

“quit true; i didn’t mean that. i meant onli two thing. on is, 
yourself as separ from bulstrod as you can: of cours, you can 
on do good work of your own by hi help; but don’t get ti. 
it seem like person feel in me to sai so—and there’s a good 
of that, i own—but person feel is not alwai in the wrong if 
boil it down to the impress which make it simpli an opinion.”

“bulstrod is noth to me,” said lydgat, carelessli, “except 
public ground. as to get veri close unit to him, i am not 
enough of him for that. but what wa the other thing you meant?” 
lydgat, who wa nurs hi leg as comfort as possibl, 
feel in no great need of advic.

“why, thi. take care—_experto crede_—take care not to get 
about monei matter. i know, by a word you let fall on dai, that 
don’t like my plai at card so much for monei. you ar right 
there. but try and keep clear of want small sum that you haven’
got. i am perhap talk rather superflu; but a man like 
assum superior over himself, by hold up hi bad exampl 
sermon on it.”

lydgat took mr. farebroth’s hint veri cordial, though he 
hardli have born them from anoth man. he could not help 
that he had late made some debt, but these had seem inevit,
and he had no intent now to do more than keep hous in a simpl wai.
the furnitur for which he ow would not want renew; nor even 
stock of wine for a long while.

mani thought cheer him at that time—and justli. a man consciou 
enthusiasm for worthi aim is sustain under petti hostil by 
memori of great worker who had to fight their wai not without wound,
and who hover in hi mind as patron saint, invis help. at home,
that same even when he had been chat with mr. farebroth, 
had hi long leg stretch on the sofa, hi head thrown back, and 
hand clasp behind it accord to hi favorit rumin attitud,
while rosamond sat at the piano, and plai on tune after anoth, 
which her husband onli knew (like the emot eleph he wa!) 
thei fell in with hi mood as if thei had been melodi sea-breez.

there wa someth veri fine in lydgat’s look just then, and ani 
might have been encourag to bet on hi achiev. in hi dark 
and on hi mouth and brow there wa that placid which come from 
ful of contempl thought—the mind not search, but behold,
and the glanc seem to be fill with what is behind it.

present rosamond left the piano and seat herself on a chair 
to the sofa and opposit her husband’s face.

“is that enough music for you, my lord?” she said, fold her 
befor her and put on a littl air of meek.

“ye, dear, if you ar tire,” said lydgat, gentli, turn hi 
and rest them on her, but not otherwis move. rosamond’s 
at that moment wa perhap no more than a spoon brought to the lake,
and her woman’s instinct in thi matter wa not dull.

“what is absorb you?” she said, lean forward and bring 
face nearer to hi.

he move hi hand and place them gentli behind her shoulder.

“i am think of a great fellow, who wa about as old as i am 
hundr year ago, and had alreadi begun a new era in anatomi.”

“i can’t guess,” said rosamond, shake her head. “we us to plai 
guess histor charact at mr. lemon’s, but not anatomist.”

“i’ll tell you. hi name wa vesaliu. and the onli wai he could get 
know anatomi as he did, wa by go to snatch bodi at night, 
graveyard and place of execut.”

“oh!” said rosamond, with a look of disgust on her pretti face, “i 
veri glad you ar not vesaliu. i should have thought he might 
some less horribl wai than that.”

“no, he couldn’t,” said lydgat, go on too earnestli to take 
notic of her answer. “he could onli get a complet skeleton 
snatch the whiten bone of a crimin from the gallow, 
buri them, and fetch them awai by bit secretli, in the dead 
night.”

“i hope he is not on of your great hero,” said rosamond, 
playfulli, half anxious, “els i shall have you get up in 
night to go to st. peter’s churchyard. you know how angri you told 
the peopl were about mr. gobi. you have enemi enough alreadi.”

“so had vesaliu, rosi. no wonder the medic fogi in middlemarch 
jealou, when some of the greatest doctor live were fierc 
vesaliu becaus thei had believ in galen, and he show that 
wa wrong. thei call him a liar and a poison monster. but 
fact of the human frame were on hi side; and so he got the better 
them.”

“and what happen to him afterward?” said rosamond, with 
interest.

“oh, he had a good deal of fight to the last. and thei 
exasper him enough at on time to make him burn a good deal of 
work. then he got shipwreck just as he wa come from jerusalem 
take a great chair at padua. he di rather miser.”

there wa a moment’s paus befor rosamond said, “do you know, tertiu,
i often wish you had not been a medic man.”

“nai, rosi, don’t sai that,” said lydgat, draw her closer to him.
“that is like sai you wish you had marri anoth man.”

“not at all; you ar clever enough for anyth: you might easili 
been someth els. and your cousin at quallingham all think that 
have sunk below them in your choic of a profess.”

“the cousin at quallingham mai go to the devil!” said lydgat, 
scorn. “it wa like their impud if thei said anyth of the 
to you.”

“still,” said rosamond, “i do _not_ think it is a nice profess,
dear.” we know that she had much quiet persever in her opinion.

“it is the grandest profess in the world, rosamond,” said lydgat,
grave. “and to sai that you love me without love the medic man 
me, is the same sort of thing as to sai that you like eat a 
but don’t like it flavor. don’t sai that again, dear, it pain me.”

“veri well, doctor grave-face,” said rosi, dimpl, “i will declar 
futur that i dote on skeleton, and bodi-snatcher, and bit of 
in phial, and quarrel with everybodi, that end in your 
miser.”

“no, no, not so bad as that,” said lydgat, give up remonstr 
pet her resignedli.




chapter xlvi.

pue no podemo haber aquello que queremo, queramo aquello 
podremo.

sinc we cannot get what we like, let us like what we can get.—_
proverb_.


while lydgat, safe marri and with the hospit under hi command,
felt himself struggl for medic reform against middlemarch,
middlemarch wa becom more and more consciou of the 
struggl for anoth kind of reform.

by the time that lord john russel’s measur wa be debat in 
hous of common, there wa a new polit anim in middlemarch,
and a new definit of parti which might show a decid chang 
balanc if a new elect came. and there were some who 
predict thi event, declar that a reform bill would never 
carri by the actual parliament. thi wa what will ladislaw dwelt 
to mr. brook as a reason for congratul that he had not yet 
hi strength at the hust.

“thing will grow and ripen as if it were a comet year,” said will.
“the public temper will soon get to a cometari heat, now the 
of reform ha set in. there is like to be anoth elect 
long, and by that time middlemarch will have got more idea into 
head. what we have to work at now is the ‘pioneer’ and 
meet.”

“quit right, ladislaw; we shall make a new thing of opinion here,”
said mr. brook. “onli i want to keep myself independ about reform,
you know; i don’t want to go too far. i want to take up wilberforc’
and romilli’s line, you know, and work at negro emancip, 
law—that kind of thing. but of cours i should support grei.”

“if you go in for the principl of reform, you must be prepar to 
what the situat offer,” said will. “if everybodi pull for hi 
bit against everybodi els, the whole question would go to tatter.”

“ye, ye, i agre with you—i quit take that point of view. i 
put it in that light. i should support grei, you know. but i don’t 
to chang the balanc of the constitut, and i don’t think 
would.”

“but that is what the countri want,” said will. “els there would 
no mean in polit union or ani other movement that know 
it’s about. it want to have a hous of common which is not 
with nomine of the land class, but with repres of 
other interest. and as to contend for a reform short of that, it 
like ask for a bit of an avalanch which ha alreadi begun 
thunder.”

“that is fine, ladislaw: that is the wai to put it. write that down,
now. we must begin to get document about the feel of the countri,
as well as the machin-break and gener distress.”

“as to document,” said will, “a two-inch card will hold plenti. a 
row of figur ar enough to deduc miseri from, and a few more 
show the rate at which the polit determin of the peopl 
grow.”

“good: draw that out a littl more at length, ladislaw. that is 
idea, now: write it out in the ‘pioneer.’ put the figur and 
the miseri, you know; and put the other figur and deduc—and so on.
you have a wai of put thing. burk, now:—when i think of burk, 
can’t help wish somebodi had a pocket-borough to give you, ladislaw.
you’d never get elect, you know. and we shall alwai want talent 
the hous: reform as we will, we shall alwai want talent. 
avalanch and the thunder, now, wa realli a littl like burk. i 
that sort of thing—not idea, you know, but a wai of put them.”

“pocket-borough would be a fine thing,” said ladislaw, “if thei 
alwai in the right pocket, and there were alwai a burk at hand.”

will wa not displeas with that complimentari comparison, even 
mr. brook; for it is a littl too try to human flesh to 
consciou of express on’s self better than other and never to 
it notic, and in the gener dearth of admir for the 
thing, even a chanc brai of applaus fall exactli in time is 
fortifi. will felt that hi literari refin were usual 
the limit of middlemarch percept; nevertheless, he wa 
thoroughli to like the work of which when he began he had said 
himself rather languidli, “why not?”—and he studi the 
situat with as ardent an interest as he had ever given to 
metr or mediaev. it is undeni that but for the desir to 
where dorothea wa, and perhap the want of know what els to do,
will would not at thi time have been medit on the need of 
english peopl or criticis english statesmanship: he would 
have been rambl in itali sketch plan for sever drama, 
prose and find it too jejun, try vers and find it 
artifici, begin to copi “bit” from old pictur, leav 
becaus thei were “no good,” and observ that, after all,
self-cultur wa the princip point; while in polit he would 
been sympath warmli with liberti and progress in gener. 
sens of duti must often wait for some work which shall take the 
of dilettant and make us feel that the qualiti of our action is 
a matter of indiffer.

ladislaw had now accept hi bit of work, though it wa not 
indetermin loftiest thing which he had onc dream of as 
worthi of continu effort. hi natur warm easili in the 
of subject which were visibl mix with life and action, and 
easili stir rebellion in him help the glow of public spirit. 
spite of mr. casaubon and the banish from lowick, he wa 
happi; get a great deal of fresh knowledg in a vivid wai and 
practic purpos, and make the “pioneer” celebr as far 
brass (never mind the small of the area; the write wa 
wors than much that reach the four corner of the earth).

mr. brook wa occasion irrit; but will’s impati 
reliev by the divis of hi time between visit to the grang 
retreat to hi middlemarch lodg, which gave varieti to hi life.

“shift the peg a littl,” he said to himself, “and mr. brook might 
in the cabinet, while i wa under-secretari. that is the common 
of thing: the littl wave make the larg on and ar of the 
pattern. i am better here than in the sort of life mr. casaubon 
have train me for, where the do would be all laid down by 
preced too rigid for me to react upon. i don’t care for prestig 
high pai.”

as lydgat had said of him, he wa a sort of gypsi, rather enjoi 
sens of belong to no class; he had a feel of romanc in 
posit, and a pleasant conscious of creat a littl 
wherev he went. that sort of enjoy had been disturb when he 
felt some new distanc between himself and dorothea in their 
meet at lydgat’s, and hi irrit had gone out toward mr.
casaubon, who had declar beforehand that will would lose cast. “
never had ani cast,” he would have said, if that propheci had 
utter to him, and the quick blood would have come and gone 
breath in hi transpar skin. but it is on thing to like defianc,
and anoth thing to like it consequ.

meanwhil, the town opinion about the new editor of the “pioneer” 
tend to confirm mr. casaubon’s view. will’s relationship in 
distinguish quarter did not, like lydgat’s high connect, 
as an advantag introduct: if it wa rumor that young 
wa mr. casaubon’s nephew or cousin, it wa also rumor that “mr.
casaubon would have noth to do with him.”

“brook ha taken him up,” said mr. hawlei, “becaus that is what 
man in hi sens could have expect. casaubon ha devilish 
reason, you mai be sure, for turn the cold shoulder on a 
fellow whose bring-up he paid for. just like brook—on of 
fellow who would prais a cat to sell a hors.”

and some odditi of will’s, more or less poetic, appear to 
mr. keck, the editor of the “trumpet,” in assert that ladislaw, 
the truth were known, wa not onli a polish emissari but crack-brain,
which account for the preternatur quick and glib of 
speech when he got on to a platform—as he did whenev he had 
opportun, speak with a facil which cast reflect on 
englishmen gener. it wa disgust to keck to see a strip of 
fellow, with light curl round hi head, get up and speechifi by 
hour against institut “which had exist when he wa in 
cradl.” and in a lead articl of the “trumpet,” keck 
ladislaw’s speech at a reform meet as “the violenc of 
energumen—a miser effort to shroud in the brillianc of 
the dare of irrespons statement and the poverti of a 
which wa of the cheapest and most recent descript.”

“that wa a rattl articl yesterdai, keck,” said dr. spragu, 
sarcast intent. “but what is an energumen?”

“oh, a term that came up in the french revolut,” said keck.

thi danger aspect of ladislaw wa strang contrast with 
habit which becam matter of remark. he had a fond, half artist,
half affection, for littl children—the smaller thei were 
toler activ leg, and the funnier their cloth, the better 
like to surpris and pleas them. we know that in rome he wa given 
rambl about among the poor peopl, and the tast did not quit him 
middlemarch.

he had somehow pick up a troop of droll children, littl hatless 
with their galligaskin much worn and scant shirt to hang out,
littl girl who toss their hair out of their ey to look at him,
and guardian brother at the matur ag of seven. thi troop he had 
out on gypsi excurs to halsel wood at nut-time, and sinc 
cold weather had set in he had taken them on a clear dai to 
stick for a bonfir in the hollow of a hillsid, where he drew out 
small feast of gingerbread for them, and improvis a punch-and-
drama with some privat home-made puppet. here wa on odditi. 
wa, that in hous where he got friendli, he wa given to 
himself at full length on the rug while he talk, and wa apt to 
discov in thi attitud by occasion caller for whom such 
irregular wa like to confirm the notion of hi danger 
blood and gener laxiti.

but will’s articl and speech natur recommend him in 
which the new strict of parti divis had mark off on the 
of reform. he wa invit to mr. bulstrod’s; but here he could not 
down on the rug, and mr. bulstrod felt that hi mode of talk 
cathol countri, as if there were ani truce with antichrist,
illustr the usual tendenc to unsound in intellectu men.

at mr. farebroth’s, howev, whom the ironi of event had brought 
the same side with bulstrod in the nation movement, will becam 
favorit with the ladi; especi with littl miss nobl, whom 
wa on of hi odditi to escort when he met her in the street 
her littl basket, give her hi arm in the ey of the town, 
insist on go with her to pai some call where she distribut 
small filch from her own share of sweet thing.

but the hous where he visit oftenest and lai most on the rug 
lydgat’s. the two men were not at all alik, but thei agre none 
wors. lydgat wa abrupt but not irrit, take littl notic 
megrim in healthi peopl; and ladislaw did not usual throw awai 
suscept on those who took no notic of them. with rosamond, 
the other hand, he pout and wa wayward—nai, often uncomplimentari,
much to her inward surpris; nevertheless he wa gradual 
necessari to her entertain by hi companionship in her music, 
vari talk, and hi freedom from the grave preoccup which, 
all her husband’s tender and indulg, often made hi 
unsatisfactori to her, and confirm her dislik of the 
profess.

lydgat, inclin to be sarcast on the superstiti faith of 
peopl in the efficaci of “the bill,” while nobodi care about the 
state of patholog, sometim assail will with troublesom question.
on even in march, rosamond in her cherri-color dress 
swansdown trim about the throat sat at the tea-tabl; lydgat,
late come in tire from hi outdoor work, wa seat sidewai on 
easi-chair by the fire with on leg over the elbow, hi brow look 
littl troubl as hi ey rambl over the column of the “pioneer,”
while rosamond, have notic that he wa perturb, avoid 
at him, and inwardli thank heaven that she herself had not a 
disposit. will ladislaw wa stretch on the rug contempl 
curtain-pole abstractedli, and hum veri low the note of “
first i saw thy face;” while the hous spaniel, also stretch out 
small choic of room, look from between hi paw at the usurp 
the rug with silent but strong object.

rosamond bring lydgat hi cup of tea, he threw down the paper, 
said to will, who had start up and gone to the tabl—

“it’s no us your puf brook as a reform landlord, ladislaw:
thei onli pick the more hole in hi coat in the ‘trumpet.’”

“no matter; those who read the ‘pioneer’ don’t read the ‘trumpet,’”
said will, swallow hi tea and walk about. “do you suppos 
public read with a view to it own convers? we should have 
witch’ brew with a vengeanc then—‘mingl, mingl, mingl, mingl,
you that mingl mai’—and nobodi would know which side he wa go 
take.”

“farebroth sai, he doesn’t believ brook would get elect if 
opportun came: the veri men who profess to be for him would 
anoth member out of the bag at the right moment.”

“there’s no harm in try. it’s good to have resid member.”

“why?” said lydgat, who wa much given to us that inconveni 
in a curt tone.

“thei repres the local stupid better,” said will, laugh, 
shake hi curl; “and thei ar kept on their best behavior in 
neighborhood. brook is not a bad fellow, but he ha done some 
thing on hi estat that he never would have done but for 
parliamentari bite.”

“he’s not fit to be a public man,” said lydgat, with 
decis. “he would disappoint everybodi who count on him: i can 
that at the hospit. onli, there bulstrod hold the rein and 
him.”

“that depend on how you fix your standard of public men,” said will.
“he’s good enough for the occas: when the peopl have made up 
mind as thei ar make it up now, thei don’t want a man—thei onli 
a vote.”

“that is the wai with you polit writer, ladislaw—cry up 
measur as if it were a univers cure, and cry up men who ar 
part of the veri diseas that want cure.”

“why not? men mai help to cure themselv off the face of the 
without know it,” said will, who could find reason impromptu, 
he had not thought of a question beforehand.

“that is no excus for encourag the superstiti exagger 
hope about thi particular measur, help the cry to swallow 
whole and to send up vote popinjai who ar good for noth but 
carri it. you go against rotten, and there is noth 
thoroughli rotten than make peopl believ that societi can be 
by a polit hocu-pocu.”

“that’s veri fine, my dear fellow. but your cure must begin somewher,
and put it that a thousand thing which debas a popul can 
be reform without thi particular reform to begin with. look 
stanlei said the other dai—that the hous had been tinker 
enough at small question of briberi, inquir whether thi or 
voter ha had a guinea when everybodi know that the seat have 
sold wholesal. wait for wisdom and conscienc in 
agent—fiddlestick! the onli conscienc we can trust to is the 
sens of wrong in a class, and the best wisdom that will work is 
wisdom of balanc claim. that’s my text—which side is injur? 
support the man who support their claim; not the virtuou uphold 
the wrong.”

“that gener talk about a particular case is mere question beg,
ladislaw. when i sai, i go in for the dose that cure, it doesn’
follow that i go in for opium in a given case of gout.”

“i am not beg the question we ar upon—whether we ar to try 
noth till we find immacul men to work with. should you go on 
plan? if there were on man who would carri you a medic reform 
anoth who would oppos it, should you inquir which had the 
motiv or even the better brain?”

“oh, of cours,” said lydgat, see himself checkmat by a 
which he had often us himself, “if on did not work with such men 
ar at hand, thing must come to a dead-lock. suppos the worst 
in the town about bulstrod were a true on, that would not make 
less true that he ha the sens and the resolut to do what i 
ought to be done in the matter i know and care most about; but that 
the onli ground on which i go with him,” lydgat ad rather proudli,
bear in mind mr. farebroth’s remark. “he is noth to 
otherwis; i would not cry him up on ani person ground—i would 
clear of that.”

“do you mean that i cry up brook on ani person ground?” said 
ladislaw, nettl, and turn sharp round. for the first time he 
offend with lydgat; not the less so, perhap, becaus he would 
declin ani close inquiri into the growth of hi relat to mr.
brook.

“not at all,” said lydgat, “i wa simpli explain my own action. 
meant that a man mai work for a special end with other whose 
and gener cours ar equivoc, if he is quit sure of hi 
independ, and that he is not work for hi 
interest—either place or monei.”

“then, why don’t you extend your liber to other?” said will,
still nettl. “my person independ is as import to me as 
is to you. you have no more reason to imagin that i have 
expect from brook, than i have to imagin that you have 
expect from bulstrod. motiv ar point of honor, 
suppos—nobodi can prove them. but as to monei and place in the world,”
will end, toss back hi head, “i think it is pretti clear that 
am not determin by consider of that sort.”

“you quit mistak me, ladislaw,” said lydgat, surpris. he had 
preoccupi with hi own vindic, and had been blind to 
ladislaw might infer on hi own account. “i beg your pardon 
unintention annoi you. in fact, i should rather attribut to 
a romant disregard of your own worldli interest. on the 
question, i refer simpli to intellectu bia.”

“how veri unpleas you both ar thi even!” said rosamond. “
cannot conceiv why monei should have been refer to. polit 
medicin ar suffici disagre to quarrel upon. you can both 
you go on quarrel with all the world and with each other on 
two topic.”

rosamond look mildli neutral as she said thi, rise to ring 
bell, and then cross to her work-tabl.

“poor rosi!” said lydgat, put out hi hand to her as she 
pass him. “disput is not amus to cherub. have some music.
ask ladislaw to sing with you.”

when will wa gone rosamond said to her husband, “what put you out 
temper thi even, tertiu?”

“me? it wa ladislaw who wa out of temper. he is like a bit 
tinder.”

“but i mean, befor that. someth had vex you befor you came in,
you look cross. and that made you begin to disput with mr. ladislaw.
you hurt me veri much when you look so, tertiu.”

“do i? then i am a brute,” said lydgat, caress her penit.

“what vex you?”

“oh, outdoor thing—busi.” it wa realli a letter insist on 
payment of a bill for furnitur. but rosamond wa expect to have 
babi, and lydgat wish to save her from ani perturb.




chapter xlvii.

wa never true love love in vain,
for truest love is highest gain.
no art can make it: it must 
where element ar foster.
so in heaven’s spot and 
spring the littl nativ flower,
downward root and upward ey,
shapen by the earth and sky.


it happen to be on a saturdai even that will ladislaw had 
littl discuss with lydgat. it effect when he went to hi 
room wa to make him sit up half the night, think over again, 
a new irrit, all that he had befor thought of hi have 
in middlemarch and har himself with mr. brook. 
befor he had taken the step had sinc turn into suscept 
everi hint that he would have been wiser not to take it; and henc 
hi heat toward lydgat—a heat which still kept him restless. wa 
not make a fool of himself?—and at a time when he wa more than 
consciou of be someth better than a fool? and for what end?

well, for no definit end. true, he had dreami vision 
possibl: there is no human be who have both passion 
thought doe not think in consequ of hi passion—doe not 
imag rise in hi mind which sooth the passion with hope or 
it with dread. but thi, which happen to us all, happen to some 
a wide differ; and will wa not on of those whose wit “keep 
roadwai:” he had hi bypath where there were littl joi of hi 
choos, such as gentlemen canter on the highroad might 
thought rather idiot. the wai in which he made a sort of 
for himself out of hi feel for dorothea wa an exampl of thi. 
mai seem strang, but it is the fact, that the ordinari vulgar 
of which mr. casaubon suspect him—name, that dorothea might 
a widow, and that the interest he had establish in her mind 
turn into accept of him as a husband—had no tempt, 
power over him; he did not live in the sceneri of such an event, 
follow it out, as we all do with that imagin “otherwis” which is 
practic heaven. it wa not onli that he wa unwil to 
thought which could be accus of base, and wa alreadi uneasi 
the sens that he had to justifi himself from the charg 
ingratitud—the latent conscious of mani other barrier 
himself and dorothea besid the exist of her husband, had 
to turn awai hi imagin from specul on what might befal mr.
casaubon. and there were yet other reason. will, we know, could 
bear the thought of ani flaw appear in hi crystal: he wa at 
exasper and delight by the calm freedom with which 
look at him and spoke to him, and there wa someth so exquisit 
think of her just as she wa, that he could not long for a 
which must somehow chang her. do we not shun the street version of 
fine melodi?—or shrink from the new that the rariti—some bit 
chisel or engrav perhap—which we have dwelt on even 
exult in the troubl it ha cost us to snatch glimps of it, 
realli not an uncommon thing, and mai be obtain as an everi-
possess? our good depend on the qualiti and breadth of our emot;
and to will, a creatur who care littl for what ar call the 
thing of life and greatli for it subtler influenc, to have 
him such a feel as he had toward dorothea, wa like the 
of a fortun. what other might have call the futil of 
passion, made an addit delight for hi imagin: he 
consciou of a gener movement, and of verifi in hi 
experi that higher love-poetri which had charm hi fanci.
dorothea, he said to himself, wa forev enthron in hi soul: 
other woman could sit higher than her footstool; and if he could 
written out in immort syllabl the effect she wrought within him, 
might have boast after the exampl of old drayton, that,—

“queen hereaft might be glad to 
upon the alm of her superflu prais.”


but thi result wa question. and what els could he do 
dorothea? what wa hi devot worth to her? it wa imposs 
tell. he would not go out of her reach. he saw no creatur among 
friend to whom he could believ that she spoke with the same 
confid as to him. she had onc said that she would like him 
stai; and stai he would, whatev fire-breath dragon might 
around her.

thi had alwai been the conclus of will’s hesit. but he 
not without contradictori and rebellion even toward hi 
resolv. he had often got irrit, as he wa on thi 
night, by some outsid demonstr that hi public exert with mr.
brook as a chief could not seem as heroic as he would like them to be,
and thi wa alwai associ with the other ground of irrit—
notwithstand hi sacrific of digniti for dorothea’s sake, he 
hardli ever see her. whereupon, not be abl to contradict 
unpleas fact, he contradict hi own strongest bia and said, “
am a fool.”

nevertheless, sinc the inward debat necessarili turn on dorothea,
he end, as he had done befor, onli by get a liveli sens 
what her presenc would be to him; and suddenli reflect that 
morrow would be sundai, he determin to go to lowick church and 
her. he slept upon that idea, but when he wa dress in the 
morn light, object said—

“that will be a virtual defianc of mr. casaubon’s prohibit to 
lowick, and dorothea will be displeas.”

“nonsens!” argu inclin, “it would be too monstrou for him 
hinder me from go out to a pretti countri church on a 
morn. and dorothea will be glad.”

“it will be clear to mr. casaubon that you have come either to 
him or to see dorothea.”

“it is not true that i go to annoi him, and why should i not go to 
dorothea? is he to have everyth to himself and be 
comfort? let him smart a littl, as other peopl ar oblig to do.
i have alwai like the quaint of the church and congreg;
besid, i know the tucker: i shall go into their pew.”

have silenc object by forc of unreason, will walk to 
as if he had been on the wai to paradis, cross halsel common 
skirt the wood, where the sunlight fell broadli under the 
bough, bring out the beauti of moss and lichen, and fresh 
growth pierc the brown. everyth seem to know that it 
sundai, and to approv of hi go to lowick church. will easili 
happi when noth cross hi humor, and by thi time the thought 
vex mr. casaubon had becom rather amus to him, make hi 
break into it merri smile, pleasant to see as the break of 
on the water—though the occas wa not exemplari. but most of us 
apt to settl within ourselv that the man who block our wai 
odiou, and not to mind caus him a littl of the disgust which 
person excit in ourselv. will went along with a small 
under hi arm and a hand in each side-pocket, never read, 
chant a littl, as he made scene of what would happen in church 
come out. he wa experi in tune to suit some word of 
own, sometim try a readi-made melodi, sometim improvis. 
word were not exactli a hymn, but thei certainli fit hi 
experi:—

“o me, o me, what frugal 
    my love doth feed upon!
a touch, a rai, that is not here,
    a shadow that is gone:

“a dream of breath that might be near,
    an inli-echo tone,
the thought that on mai think me dear,
    the place where on wa known,

“the tremor of a banish fear,
     an ill that wa not done—
o me, o me, what frugal 
    my love doth feed upon!”


sometim, when he took off hi hat, shake hi head backward, 
show hi delic throat as he sang, he look like an 
of the spring whose spirit fill the air—a bright creatur, 
in uncertain promis.

the bell were still ring when he got to lowick, and he went 
the curat’s pew befor ani on els arriv there. but he wa 
left alon in it when the congreg had assembl. the curat’s 
wa opposit the rector’s at the entranc of the small chancel, 
will had time to fear that dorothea might not come while he 
round at the group of rural face which made the congreg from 
to year within the white-wash wall and dark old pew, hardli 
more chang than we see in the bough of a tree which break here 
there with ag, but yet ha young shoot. mr. rigg’s frog-face 
someth alien and unaccount, but notwithstand thi shock 
the order of thing, there were still the waul and the rural stock 
the powderel in their pew side by side; brother samuel’s cheek 
the same purpl round as ever, and the three gener of 
cottag came as of old with a sens of duti to their 
gener—the smaller children regard mr. casaubon, who wore 
black gown and mount to the highest box, as probabl the chief of 
better, and the on most aw if offend. even in 1831 lowick wa 
peac, not more agit by reform than by the solemn tenor of 
sundai sermon. the congreg had been us to see will at 
in former dai, and no on took much note of him except the choir, 
expect him to make a figur in the sing.

dorothea did at last appear on thi quaint background, walk up 
short aisl in her white beaver bonnet and grai cloak—the same she 
worn in the vatican. her face be, from her entranc, toward 
chancel, even her shortsight ey soon discern will, but there 
no outward show of her feel except a slight pale and a grave 
as she pass him. to hi own surpris will felt 
uncomfort, and dare not look at her after thei had bow to 
other. two minut later, when mr. casaubon came out of the vestri,
and, enter the pew, seat himself in face of dorothea, will 
hi paralysi more complet. he could look nowher except at the 
in the littl galleri over the vestri-door: dorothea wa 
pain, and he had made a wretch blunder. it wa no longer amus 
vex mr. casaubon, who had the advantag probabl of watch him 
see that he dare not turn hi head. why had he not imagin 
beforehand?—but he could not expect that he should sit in that 
pew alon, unreliev by ani tucker, who had appar depart 
lowick altogeth, for a new clergyman wa in the desk. still he 
himself stupid now for not forese that it would be imposs 
him to look toward dorothea—nai, that she might feel hi come 
impertin. there wa no deliv himself from hi cage, howev;
and will found hi place and look at hi book as if he had been 
school-mistress, feel that the morn servic had never been 
immeasur long befor, that he wa utterli ridicul, out 
temper, and miser. thi wa what a man got by worship the 
of a woman! the clerk observ with surpris that mr. ladislaw did 
join in the tune of hanov, and reflect that he might have a cold.

mr. casaubon did not preach that morn, and there wa no chang 
will’s situat until the bless had been pronounc and everi 
rose. it wa the fashion at lowick for “the better” to go out first.
with a sudden determin to break the spell that wa upon him, 
look straight at mr. casaubon. but that gentleman’s ey were on 
button of the pew-door, which he open, allow dorothea to pass, 
follow her immedi without rais hi eyelid. will’s 
had caught dorothea’s as she turn out of the pew, and again 
bow, but thi time with a look of agit, as if she 
repress tear. will walk out after them, but thei went on 
the littl gate lead out of the churchyard into the shrubberi, 
look round.

it wa imposs for him to follow them, and he could onli walk 
sadli at mid-dai along the same road which he had trodden hopefulli 
the morn. the light were all chang for him both without 
within.




chapter xlviii.

sure the golden hour ar turn 
and danc no more, and vainli strive to run:
i see their white lock stream in the wind—
each face is haggard as it look at me,
slow turn in the constant clasp 
storm-driven.


dorothea’s distress when she wa leav the church came chiefli 
the percept that mr. casaubon wa determin not to speak to 
cousin, and that will’s presenc at church had serv to mark 
strongli the alien between them. will’s come seem to her 
excus, nai, she thought it an amiabl movement in him toward 
reconcili which she herself had been constantli wish for. 
had probabl imagin, as she had, that if mr. casaubon and he 
meet easili, thei would shake hand and friendli intercours 
return. but now dorothea felt quit rob of that hope. will 
banish further than ever, for mr. casaubon must have been 
embitt by thi thrust upon him of a presenc which he refus 
recogn.

he had not been veri well that morn, suffer from some 
in breath, and had not preach in consequ; she wa 
surpris, therefor, that he wa nearli silent at luncheon, still 
that he made no allus to will ladislaw. for her own part she 
that she could never again introduc that subject. thei usual 
apart the hour between luncheon and dinner on a sundai; mr. 
in the librari doze chiefli, and dorothea in her boudoir, where 
wa wont to occupi herself with some of her favorit book. there wa 
littl heap of them on the tabl in the bow-window—of variou sort,
from herodotu, which she wa learn to read with mr. casaubon, 
her old companion pascal, and kebl’s “christian year.” but to-dai 
open on after anoth, and could read none of them. 
seem dreari: the portent befor the birth of cyru—
antiqu—oh dear!—devout epigram—the sacr chime of 
hymn—all alik were as flat as tune beaten on wood: even the 
flower and the grass had a dull shiver in them under the 
cloud that hid the sun fitfulli; even the sustain thought 
had becom habit seem to have in them the weari of long 
dai in which she would still live with them for her sole companion.
it wa anoth or rather a fuller sort of companionship that 
dorothea wa hunger for, and the hunger had grown from the 
effort demand by her marri life. she wa alwai try to be 
her husband wish, and never abl to repos on hi delight in what 
wa. the thing that she like, that she spontan care to have,
seem to be alwai exclud from her life; for if it wa onli 
and not share by her husband it might as well have been deni. 
will ladislaw there had been a differ between them from the first,
and it had end, sinc mr. casaubon had so sever 
dorothea’s strong feel about hi claim on the famili properti, 
her be convinc that she wa in the right and her husband in 
wrong, but that she wa helpless. thi afternoon the helpless 
more wretchedli benumb than ever: she long for object who 
be dear to her, and to whom she could be dear. she long for 
which would be directli benefic like the sunshin and the rain, 
now it appear that she wa to live more and more in a virtual tomb,
where there wa the apparatu of a ghastli labor produc what 
never see the light. todai she had stood at the door of the tomb 
seen will ladislaw reced into the distant world of warm activ 
fellowship—turn hi face toward her as he went.

book were of no us. think wa of no us. it wa sundai, and 
could not have the carriag to go to celia, who had late had a babi.
there wa no refug now from spiritu empti and discont, 
dorothea had to bear her bad mood, as she would have born a headach.

after dinner, at the hour when she usual began to read aloud, mr.
casaubon propos that thei should go into the librari, where, he said,
he had order a fire and light. he seem to have reviv, and to 
think intent.

in the librari dorothea observ that he had newli arrang a row 
hi note-book on a tabl, and now he took up and put into her hand 
well-known volum, which wa a tabl of content to all the other.

“you will oblig me, my dear,” he said, seat himself, “if instead 
other read thi even, you will go through thi aloud, pencil 
hand, and at each point where i sai ‘mark,’ will make a cross with 
pencil. thi is the first step in a sift process which i have 
had in view, and as we go on i shall be abl to indic to you 
principl of select wherebi you will, i trust, have an 
particip in my purpos.”

thi propos wa onli on more sign ad to mani sinc hi 
interview with lydgat, that mr. casaubon’s origin reluct to 
dorothea work with him had given place to the contrari disposit,
name, to demand much interest and labor from her.

after she had read and mark for two hour, he said, “we will take 
volum up-stair—and the pencil, if you pleas—and in case of 
in the night, we can pursu thi task. it is not wearisom to you, 
trust, dorothea?”

“i prefer alwai read what you like best to hear,” said dorothea,
who told the simpl truth; for what she dread wa to exert herself 
read or anyth els which left him as joyless as ever.

it wa a proof of the forc with which certain characterist 
dorothea impress those around her, that her husband, with all 
jealousi and suspicion, had gather implicit trust in the integr 
her promis, and her power of devot herself to her idea of 
right and best. of late he had begun to feel that these qualiti 
a peculiar possess for himself, and he want to engross them.

the read in the night did come. dorothea in her young weari 
slept soon and fast: she wa awaken by a sens of light, which 
to her at first like a sudden vision of sunset after she had climb 
steep hill: she open her ey and saw her husband wrap in hi 
gown seat himself in the arm-chair near the fire-place where 
ember were still glow. he had lit two candl, expect 
dorothea would awak, but not like to rous her by more direct mean.

“ar you ill, edward?” she said, rise immedi.

“i felt some uneasi in a reclin postur. i will sit here for 
time.” she threw wood on the fire, wrap herself up, and said, “
would like me to read to you?”

“you would oblig me greatli by do so, dorothea,” said mr. casaubon,
with a shade more meek than usual in hi polit manner. “i 
wake: my mind is remark lucid.”

“i fear that the excit mai be too great for you,” said dorothea,
rememb lydgat’s caution.

“no, i am not consciou of undu excit. thought is easi.” 
dare not insist, and she read for an hour or more on the same plan 
she had done in the even, but get over the page with 
quick. mr. casaubon’s mind wa more alert, and he seem 
anticip what wa come after a veri slight verbal indic,
sai, “that will do—mark that”—or “pass on to the next head—i 
the second excursu on crete.” dorothea wa amaz to think of 
bird-like speed with which hi mind wa survei the ground where 
had been creep for year. at last he said—

“close the book now, my dear. we will resum our work to-morrow. i 
defer it too long, and would gladli see it complet. but 
observ that the principl on which my select is made, is to 
adequ, and not disproportion illustr to each of the 
enumer in my introduct, as at present sketch. you 
perceiv that distinctli, dorothea?”

“ye,” said dorothea, rather tremul. she felt sick at heart.

“and now i think that i can take some repos,” said mr. casaubon. 
laid down again and beg her to put out the light. when she had 
down too, and there wa a dark onli broken by a dull glow on 
hearth, he said—

“befor i sleep, i have a request to make, dorothea.”

“what is it?” said dorothea, with dread in her mind.

“it is that you will let me know, deliber, whether, in case of 
death, you will carri out my wish: whether you will avoid do 
i should deprec, and appli yourself to do what i should desir.”

dorothea wa not taken by surpris: mani incid had been lead 
to the conjectur of some intent on her husband’s part which 
make a new yoke for her. she did not answer immedi.

“you refus?” said mr. casaubon, with more edg in hi tone.

“no, i do not yet refus,” said dorothea, in a clear voic, the need 
freedom assert itself within her; “but it is too solemn—i think 
is not right—to make a promis when i am ignor what it will bind 
to. whatev affect prompt i would do without promis.”

“but you would us your own judgment: i ask you to obei mine; 
refus.”

“no, dear, no!” said dorothea, beseechingli, crush by oppos fear.
“but mai i wait and reflect a littl while? i desir with my whole 
to do what will comfort you; but i cannot give ani 
suddenli—still less a pledg to do i know not what.”

“you cannot then confid in the natur of my wish?”

“grant me till to-morrow,” said dorothea, beseechingli.

“till to-morrow then,” said mr. casaubon.

soon she could hear that he wa sleep, but there wa no more 
for her. while she constrain herself to lie still lest she 
disturb him, her mind wa carri on a conflict in which 
rang it forc first on on side and then on the other. she had 
presenti that the power which her husband wish to establish 
her futur action had relat to anyth els than hi work. but 
wa clear enough to her that he would expect her to devot herself 
sift those mix heap of materi, which were to be the 
illustr of principl still more doubt. the poor child 
becom altogeth unbeliev as to the trustworthi of that 
which had made the ambit and the labor of her husband’s life. it 
not wonder that, in spite of her small instruct, her judgment 
thi matter wa truer than hi: for she look with 
comparison and healthi sens at probabl on which he had 
all hi egoism. and now she pictur to herself the dai, and month,
and year which she must spend in sort what might be 
shatter mummi, and fragment of a tradit which wa itself 
mosaic wrought from crush ruin—sort them as food for a 
which wa alreadi wither in the birth like an elfin child. 
a vigor error vigor pursu ha kept the embryo of 
a-breath: the quest of gold be at the same time a question 
substanc, the bodi of chemistri is prepar for it soul, 
lavoisi is born. but mr. casaubon’s theori of the element which 
the seed of all tradit wa not like to bruis itself 
against discoveri: it float among flexibl conjectur no 
solid than those etymolog which seem strong becaus of like 
sound until it wa shown that like in sound made them imposs:
it wa a method of interpret which wa not test by the 
of form anyth which had sharper collis than an 
notion of gog and magog: it wa as free from interrupt as a plan 
thread the star togeth. and dorothea had so often had to 
her weari and impati over thi question riddl-guess, 
it reveal itself to her instead of the fellowship in high 
which wa to make life worthier! she could understand well enough 
why her husband had come to cling to her, as possibl the onli 
left that hi labor would ever take a shape in which thei could 
given to the world. at first it had seem that he wish to keep 
her aloof from ani close knowledg of what he wa do; but 
the terribl stringenc of human need—the prospect of a too 
death—

and here dorothea’s piti turn from her own futur to her husband’
past—nai, to hi present hard struggl with a lot which had grown 
of that past: the lone labor, the ambit breath hardli under 
pressur of self-distrust; the goal reced, and the heavier limb;
and now at last the sword visibl trembl abov him! and had she 
wish to marri him that she might help him in hi life’s labor?—
she had thought the work wa to be someth greater, which she 
serv in devoutli for it own sake. wa it right, even to sooth 
grief—would it be possibl, even if she promis—to work as in 
treadmil fruitlessli?

and yet, could she deni him? could she sai, “i refus to content 
pine hunger?” it would be refus to do for him dead, what she 
almost sure to do for him live. if he live as lydgat had said 
might, for fifteen year or more, her life would certainli be spent 
help him and obei him.

still, there wa a deep differ between that devot to the 
and that indefinit promis of devot to the dead. while he live, 
could claim noth that she would not still be free to 
against, and even to refus. but—the thought pass through her 
more than onc, though she could not believ in it—might he not mean 
demand someth more from her than she had been abl to imagin, 
he want her pledg to carri out hi wish without tell 
exactli what thei were? no; hi heart wa bound up in hi work onli:
that wa the end for which hi fail life wa to be ek out by her.

and now, if she were to sai, “no! if you die, i will put no finger 
your work“—it seem as if she would be crush that bruis heart.

for four hour dorothea lai in thi conflict, till she felt ill 
bewild, unabl to resolv, prai mute. helpless as a 
which ha sob and sought too long, she fell into a late 
sleep, and when she wake mr. casaubon wa alreadi up. tantripp 
her that he had read prayer, breakfast, and wa in the librari.

“i never saw you look so pale, madam,” said tantripp, a solid-
woman who had been with the sister at lausann.

“wa i ever high-color, tantripp?” said dorothea, smile faintli.

“well, not to sai high-color, but with a bloom like a chini rose. 
alwai smell those leather book, what can be expect? do rest 
littl thi morn, madam. let me sai you ar ill and not abl to 
into that close librari.”

“oh no, no! let me make hast,” said dorothea. “mr. casaubon want 
particularli.”

when she went down she felt sure that she should promis to fulfil 
wish; but that would be later in the dai—not yet.

as dorothea enter the librari, mr. casaubon turn round from 
tabl where he had been place some book, and said—

“i wa wait for your appear, my dear. i had hope to set to 
at onc thi morn, but i find myself under some indisposit,
probabl from too much excit yesterdai. i am go now to take 
turn in the shrubberi, sinc the air is milder.”

“i am glad to hear that,” said dorothea. “your mind, i fear, wa 
activ last night.”

“i would fain have it set at rest on the point i last spoke of,
dorothea. you can now, i hope, give me an answer.”

“mai i come out to you in the garden present?” said dorothea, 
a littl breath space in that wai.

“i shall be in the yew-tree walk for the next half-hour,” said mr.
casaubon, and then he left her.

dorothea, feel veri weari, rang and ask tantripp to bring her 
wrap. she had been sit still for a few minut, but not in 
renew of the former conflict: she simpli felt that she wa go 
sai “ye” to her own doom: she wa too weak, too full of dread at 
thought of inflict a keen-edg blow on her husband, to do 
but submit complet. she sat still and let tantripp put on her 
and shawl, a passiv which wa unusu with her, for she like 
wait on herself.

“god bless you, madam!” said tantripp, with an irrepress 
of love toward the beauti, gentl creatur for whom she felt 
to do anyth more, now that she had finish ty the bonnet.

thi wa too much for dorothea’s highli-strung feel, and she 
into tear, sob against tantripp’s arm. but soon she 
herself, dri her ey, and went out at the glass door into 
shrubberi.

“i wish everi book in that librari wa built into a caticom for 
master,” said tantripp to pratt, the butler, find him in 
breakfast-room. she had been at rome, and visit the antiqu, 
we know; and she alwai declin to call mr. casaubon anyth 
“your master,” when speak to the other servant.

pratt laugh. he like hi master veri well, but he like 
better.

when dorothea wa out on the gravel walk, she linger among 
nearer clump of tree, hesit, as she had done onc befor, 
from a differ caus. then she had fear lest her effort 
fellowship should be unwelcom; now she dread go to the spot 
she foresaw that she must bind herself to a fellowship from which 
shrank. neither law nor the world’s opinion compel her to thi—
her husband’s natur and her own compass, onli the ideal and not 
real yoke of marriag. she saw clearli enough the whole situat, 
she wa fetter: she could not smite the stricken soul that 
her. if that were weak, dorothea wa weak. but the half-hour 
pass, and she must not delai longer. when she enter the yew-
walk she could not see her husband; but the walk had bend, and 
went, expect to catch sight of hi figur wrap in a blue cloak,
which, with a warm velvet cap, wa hi outer garment on chill dai 
the garden. it occur to her that he might be rest in 
summer-hous, toward which the path diverg a littl. turn 
angl, she could see him seat on the bench, close to a stone tabl.
hi arm were rest on the tabl, and hi brow wa bow down 
them, the blue cloak be drag forward and screen hi face 
each side.

“he exhaust himself last night,” dorothea said to herself, 
at first that he wa asleep, and that the summer-hous wa too damp 
place to rest in. but then she rememb that of late she had seen 
take that attitud when she wa read to him, as if he found 
easier than ani other; and that he would sometim speak, as well 
listen, with hi face down in that wai. she went into the 
and said, “i am come, edward; i am readi.”

he took no notic, and she thought that he must be fast asleep. 
laid her hand on hi shoulder, and repeat, “i am readi!” still he 
motionless; and with a sudden confus fear, she lean down to him,
took off hi velvet cap, and lean her cheek close to hi head, 
in a distress tone—

“wake, dear, wake! listen to me. i am come to answer.” but 
never gave her answer.

later in the dai, lydgat wa seat by her bedsid, and she 
talk deliri, think aloud, and recal what had 
through her mind the night befor. she knew him, and call him by 
name, but appear to think it right that she should explain 
to him; and again, and again, beg him to explain everyth to 
husband.

“tell him i shall go to him soon: i am readi to promis. onli, 
about it wa so dread—it ha made me ill. not veri ill. i shall 
be better. go and tell him.”

but the silenc in her husband’s ear wa never more to be broken.




chapter xlix.

“a task too strong for wizard 
thi squir had brought about;
’t is easi drop stone in well,
but who shall get them out?”


“i wish to god we could hinder dorothea from know thi,” said 
jame chettam, with a littl frown on hi brow, and an express 
intens disgust about hi mouth.

he wa stand on the hearth-rug in the librari at lowick grang, 
speak to mr. brook. it wa the dai after mr. casaubon had 
buri, and dorothea wa not yet abl to leav her room.

“that would be difficult, you know, chettam, as she is an executrix,
and she like to go into these thing—properti, land, that kind 
thing. she ha her notion, you know,” said mr. brook, stick 
ey-glass on nervous, and explor the edg of a fold 
which he held in hi hand; “and she would like to act—depend upon it,
as an executrix dorothea would want to act. and she wa twenti-on 
decemb, you know. i can hinder noth.”

sir jame look at the carpet for a minut in silenc, and 
lift hi ey suddenli fix them on mr. brook, sai, “i 
tell you what we can do. until dorothea is well, all busi must 
kept from her, and as soon as she is abl to be move she must come 
us. be with celia and the babi will be the best thing in the 
for her, and will pass awai the time. and meanwhil you must get rid 
ladislaw: you must send him out of the countri.” here sir jame’s 
of disgust return in all it intens.

mr. brook put hi hand behind him, walk to the window 
straighten hi back with a littl shake befor he repli.

“that is easili said, chettam, easili said, you know.”

“my dear sir,” persist sir jame, restrain hi indign 
respect form, “it wa you who brought him here, and you who 
him here—i mean by the occup you give him.”

“ye, but i can’t dismiss him in an instant without assign reason,
my dear chettam. ladislaw ha been invalu, most satisfactori. 
consid that i have done thi part of the countri a servic 
bring him—by bring him, you know.” mr. brook end with a nod,
turn round to give it.

“it’s a piti thi part of the countri didn’t do without him, that’s 
i have to sai about it. at ani rate, as dorothea’s brother-in-law, 
feel warrant in object strongli to hi be kept here by 
action on the part of her friend. you admit, i hope, that i have 
right to speak about what concern the digniti of my wife’s sister?”

sir jame wa get warm.

“of cours, my dear chettam, of cours. but you and i have 
idea—differ—”

“not about thi action of casaubon’s, i should hope,” interrupt 
jame. “i sai that he ha most unfairli compromis dorothea. i 
that there never wa a meaner, more ungentlemanli action than thi—
codicil of thi sort to a will which he made at the time of 
marriag with the knowledg and relianc of her famili—a 
insult to dorothea!”

“well, you know, casaubon wa a littl twist about ladislaw. 
ha told me the reason—dislik of the bent he took, you know—
didn’t think much of casaubon’s notion, thoth and dagon—that sort 
thing: and i fanci that casaubon didn’t like the independ 
ladislaw had taken up. i saw the letter between them, you know. 
casaubon wa a littl buri in book—he didn’t know the world.”

“it’s all veri well for ladislaw to put that color on it,” said 
jame. “but i believ casaubon wa onli jealou of him on dorothea’
account, and the world will suppos that she gave him some reason; 
that is what make it so abomin—coupl her name with thi 
fellow’s.”

“my dear chettam, it won’t lead to anyth, you know,” said mr.
brook, seat himself and stick on hi ey-glass again. “it’s 
of a piec with casaubon’s odditi. thi paper, now, ‘
tabul’ and so on, ‘for the us of mr. casaubon,’ it wa lock 
in the desk with the will. i suppos he meant dorothea to publish 
research, eh? and she’ll do it, you know; she ha gone into 
studi uncommonli.”

“my dear sir,” said sir jame, impati, “that is neither here 
there. the question is, whether you don’t see with me the proprieti 
send young ladislaw awai?”

“well, no, not the urgenc of the thing. by-and-by, perhap, it 
come round. as to gossip, you know, send him awai won’t 
gossip. peopl sai what thei like to sai, not what thei have 
and vers for,” said mr brook, becom acut about the truth 
lai on the side of hi own wish. “i might get rid of ladislaw up to 
certain point—take awai the ‘pioneer’ from him, and that sort of thing;
but i couldn’t send him out of the countri if he didn’t choos 
go—didn’t choos, you know.”

mr. brook, persist as quietli as if he were onli discuss 
natur of last year’s weather, and nod at the end with hi 
amen, wa an exasper form of obstinaci.

“good god!” said sir jame, with as much passion as he ever show,
“let us get him a post; let us spend monei on him. if he could go 
the suit of some coloni governor! grampu might take him—and i 
write to fulk about it.”

“but ladislaw won’t be ship off like a head of cattl, my 
fellow; ladislaw ha hi idea. it’s my opinion that if he were to 
from me to-morrow, you’d onli hear the more of him in the countri. 
hi talent for speak and draw up document, there ar few men 
could come up to him as an agit—an agit, you know.”

“agit!” said sir jame, with bitter emphasi, feel that 
syllabl of thi word properli repeat were a suffici exposur 
it hate.

“but be reason, chettam. dorothea, now. as you sai, she had 
go to celia as soon as possibl. she can stai under your roof, and 
the mean time thing mai come round quietli. don’t let us be fire 
our gun in a hurri, you know. standish will keep our counsel, and 
new will be old befor it’s known. twenti thing mai happen to 
off ladislaw—without my do anyth, you know.”

“then i am to conclud that you declin to do anyth?”

“declin, chettam?—no—i didn’t sai declin. but i realli don’t see 
i could do. ladislaw is a gentleman.”

“i am glad to hear it!” said sir jame, hi irrit make 
forget himself a littl. “i am sure casaubon wa not.”

“well, it would have been wors if he had made the codicil to 
her from marri again at all, you know.”

“i don’t know that,” said sir jame. “it would have been 
indel.”

“on of poor casaubon’s freak! that attack upset hi brain a littl.
it all goe for noth. she doesn’t _want_ to marri ladislaw.”

“but thi codicil is frame so as to make everybodi believ that 
did. i don’t believ anyth of the sort about dorothea,” said 
jame—then frowningli, “but i suspect ladislaw. i tell you frankli, 
suspect ladislaw.”

“i couldn’t take ani immedi action on that ground, chettam. in fact,
if it were possibl to pack him off—send him to norfolk island—
sort of thing—it would look all the wors for dorothea to those 
knew about it. it would seem as if we distrust her—distrust her,
you know.”

that mr. brook had hit on an undeni argument, did not tend 
sooth sir jame. he put out hi hand to reach hi hat, impli 
he did not mean to contend further, and said, still with some heat—

“well, i can onli sai that i think dorothea wa sacrif onc,
becaus her friend were too careless. i shall do what i can, as 
brother, to protect her now.”

“you can’t do better than get her to freshitt as soon as possibl,
chettam. i approv that plan altogeth,” said mr. brook, well 
that he had won the argument. it would have been highli inconveni 
him to part with ladislaw at that time, when a dissolut might 
ani dai, and elector were to be convinc of the cours by which 
interest of the countri would be best serv. mr. brook 
believ that thi end could be secur by hi own return 
parliament: he offer the forc of hi mind honestli to the nation.




chapter l.

“thi loller here wol precilen us somewhat.”
“nai by my father’s soul! that schal he nat,”
sayd the schipman, ‘here schal he not prech,
we schal no gospel glosen here ne tech.
we leven all in the gret god,’ quod he.
he wolden sowen some diffculte.”—_canterburi tale_.


dorothea had been safe at freshitt hall nearli a week befor she 
ask ani danger question. everi morn now she sat with celia 
the prettiest of up-stair sit-room, open into a 
conservatori—celia all in white and lavend like a bunch of 
violet, watch the remark act of the babi, which were 
dubiou to her inexperienc mind that all convers wa 
by appeal for their interpret made to the oracular nurs.
dorothea sat by in her widow’s dress, with an express which 
provok celia, as be much too sad; for not onli wa babi 
well, but realli when a husband had been so dull and troublesom 
he live, and besid that had—well, well! sir jame, of cours, 
told celia everyth, with a strong represent how import 
wa that dorothea should not know it sooner than wa inevit.

but mr. brook had been right in predict that dorothea would 
long remain passiv where action had been assign to her; she knew 
purport of her husband’s will made at the time of their marriag, 
her mind, as soon as she wa clearli consciou of her posit, 
silent occupi with what she ought to do as the owner of 
manor with the patronag of the live attach to it.

on morn when her uncl paid hi usual visit, though with an 
alacr in hi manner which he account for by sai that it wa 
pretti certain parliament would be dissolv forthwith, dorothea said—

“uncl, it is right now that i should consid who is to have 
live at lowick. after mr. tucker had been provid for, i never 
my husband sai that he had ani clergyman in hi mind as a successor 
himself. i think i ought to have the kei now and go to lowick 
examin all my husband’s paper. there mai be someth that 
throw light on hi wish.”

“no hurri, my dear,” said mr. brook, quietli. “by-and-by, you know,
you can go, if you like. but i cast my ey over thing in the 
and drawer—there wa noth—noth but deep subject, 
know—besid the will. everyth can be done by-and-by. as to 
live, i have had an applic for interest alreadi—i should 
rather good. mr. tyke ha been strongli recommend to me—i 
someth to do with get him an appoint befor. an 
man, i believ—the sort of thing that would suit you, my dear.”

“i should like to have fuller knowledg about him, uncl, and judg 
myself, if mr. casaubon ha not left ani express of hi wish. 
ha perhap made some addit to hi will—there mai be 
instruct for me,” said dorothea, who had all the while had 
conjectur in her mind with relat to her husband’s work.

“noth about the rectori, my dear—noth,” said mr. brook, 
to go awai, and put out hi hand to hi niec: “nor about 
research, you know. noth in the will.”

dorothea’s lip quiver.

“come, you must not think of these thing yet, my dear. by-and-by, 
know.”

“i am quit well now, uncl; i wish to exert myself.”

“well, well, we shall see. but i must run awai now—i have no end 
work now—it’s a crisi—a polit crisi, you know. and here is 
and her littl man—you ar an aunt, you know, now, and i am a sort 
grandfath,” said mr. brook, with placid hurri, anxiou to get 
and tell chettam that it would not be hi (mr. brook’s) fault 
dorothea insist on look into everyth.

dorothea sank back in her chair when her uncl had left the room, 
cast her ey down medit on her cross hand.

“look, dodo! look at him! did you ever see anyth like that?” 
celia, in her comfort staccato.

“what, kitti?” said dorothea, lift her ey rather absent.

“what? why, hi upper lip; see how he is draw it down, as if 
meant to make a face. isn’t it wonder! he mai have hi 
thought. i wish nurs were here. do look at him.”

a larg tear which had been for some time gather, roll 
dorothea’s cheek as she look up and tri to smile.

“don’t be sad, dodo; kiss babi. what ar you brood over so? i 
sure you did everyth, and a great deal too much. you should be 
now.”

“i wonder if sir jame would drive me to lowick. i want to look 
everyth—to see if there were ani word written for me.”

“you ar not to go till mr. lydgat sai you mai go. and he ha 
said so yet (here you ar, nurs; take babi and walk up and down 
galleri). besid, you have got a wrong notion in your head as usual,
dodo—i can see that: it vex me.”

“where am i wrong, kitti?” said dorothea, quit meekli. she wa 
readi now to think celia wiser than herself, and wa realli 
with some fear what her wrong notion wa. celia felt her advantag, 
wa determin to us it. none of them knew dodo as well as she did, 
knew how to manag her. sinc celia’s babi wa born, she had had a 
sens of her mental solid and calm wisdom. it seem clear 
where there wa a babi, thing were right enough, and that error, 
gener, wa a mere lack of that central pois forc.

“i can see what you ar think of as well as can be, dodo,” 
celia. “you ar want to find out if there is anyth 
for you to do now, onli becaus mr. casaubon wish it. as if you 
not been uncomfort enough befor. and he doesn’t deserv it, 
you will find that out. he ha behav veri badli. jame is as 
with him as can be. and i had better tell you, to prepar you.”

“celia,” said dorothea, entreatingli, “you distress me. tell me at 
what you mean.” it glanc through her mind that mr. casaubon had 
the properti awai from her—which would not be so veri distress.

“why, he ha made a codicil to hi will, to sai the properti wa all 
go awai from you if you marri—i mean—”

“that is of no consequ,” said dorothea, break in impetu.

“but if you marri mr. ladislaw, not anybodi els,” celia went on 
persev quietud. “of cours that is of no consequ in 
wai—you never _would_ marri mr. ladislaw; but that onli make it 
of mr. casaubon.”

the blood rush to dorothea’s face and neck painfulli. but celia 
administ what she thought a sober dose of fact. it wa 
up notion that had done dodo’s health so much harm. so she went on 
her neutral tone, as if she had been remark on babi’s robe.

“jame sai so. he sai it is abomin, and not like a gentleman. 
there never wa a better judg than jame. it is as if mr. 
want to make peopl believ that you would wish to marri mr.
ladislaw—which is ridicul. onli jame sai it wa to hinder mr.
ladislaw from want to marri you for your monei—just as if he 
would think of make you an offer. mr. cadwallad said you might 
well marri an italian with white mice! but i must just go and look 
babi,” celia ad, without the least chang of tone, throw a 
shawl over her, and trip awai.

dorothea by thi time had turn cold again, and now threw herself 
helplessli in her chair. she might have compar her experi at 
moment to the vagu, alarm conscious that her life wa take 
a new form, that she wa undergo a metamorphosi in which 
would not adjust itself to the stir of new organ. everyth 
chang it aspect: her husband’s conduct, her own duteou 
toward him, everi struggl between them—and yet more, her 
relat to will ladislaw. her world wa in a state of 
chang; the onli thing she could sai distinctli to herself wa, 
she must wait and think anew. on chang terrifi her as if it 
been a sin; it wa a violent shock of repuls from her 
husband, who had had hidden thought, perhap pervert everyth 
said and did. then again she wa consciou of anoth chang which 
made her tremul; it wa a sudden strang yearn of heart 
will ladislaw. it had never befor enter her mind that he could,
under ani circumst, be her lover: conceiv the effect of 
sudden revel that anoth had thought of him in that light—
perhap he himself had been consciou of such a possibl,—and 
with the hurri, crowd vision of unfit condit, 
question not soon to be solv.

it seem a long while—she did not know how long—befor she heard 
sai, “that will do, nurs; he will be quiet on my lap now. you 
go to lunch, and let garratt stai in the next room. what i think,
dodo,” celia went on, observ noth more than that dorothea 
lean back in her chair, and like to be passiv, “is that mr.
casaubon wa spite. i never did like him, and jame never did. 
think the corner of hi mouth were dreadfulli spite. and now he 
behav in thi wai, i am sure religion doe not requir you to 
yourself uncomfort about him. if he ha been taken awai, that is 
merci, and you ought to be grate. we should not griev, should we,
babi?” said celia confidenti to that unconsci centr and 
of the world, who had the most remark fist all complet even 
the nail, and hair enough, realli, when you took hi cap off, 
make—you didn’t know what:—in short, he wa bouddha in a western form.

at thi crisi lydgat wa announc, and on of the first thing 
said wa, “i fear you ar not so well as you were, mr. casaubon; 
you been agit? allow me to feel your puls.” dorothea’s hand wa 
a marbl cold.

“she want to go to lowick, to look over paper,” said celia. “
ought not, ought she?”

lydgat did not speak for a few moment. then he said, look 
dorothea. “i hardli know. in my opinion mr. casaubon should do 
would give her the most repos of mind. that repos will not 
come from be forbidden to act.”

“thank you,” said dorothea, exert herself, “i am sure that is wise.
there ar so mani thing which i ought to attend to. why should i 
here idl?” then, with an effort to recal subject not connect 
her agit, she ad, abruptli, “you know everi on in middlemarch,
i think, mr. lydgat. i shall ask you to tell me a great deal. i 
seriou thing to do now. i have a live to give awai. you know mr.
tyke and all the—” but dorothea’s effort wa too much for her; 
broke off and burst into sob.

lydgat made her drink a dose of sal volatil.

“let mr. casaubon do as she like,” he said to sir jame, whom 
ask to see befor quit the hous. “she want perfect freedom, 
think, more than ani other prescript.”

hi attend on dorothea while her brain wa excit, had enabl 
to form some true conclus concern the trial of her life. 
felt sure that she had been suffer from the strain and conflict 
self-repress; and that she wa like now to feel herself onli 
anoth sort of pinfold than that from which she had been releas.

lydgat’s advic wa all the easier for sir jame to follow when 
found that celia had alreadi told dorothea the unpleas fact 
the will. there wa no help for it now—no reason for ani further 
in the execut of necessari busi. and the next dai sir 
compli at onc with her request that he would drive her to lowick.

“i have no wish to stai there at present,” said dorothea; “i 
hardli bear it. i am much happier at freshitt with celia. i shall 
abl to think better about what should be done at lowick by look 
it from a distanc. and i should like to be at the grang a 
while with my uncl, and go about in all the old walk and among 
peopl in the villag.”

“not yet, i think. your uncl is have polit compani, and you 
better out of the wai of such do,” said sir jame, who at 
moment thought of the grang chiefli as a haunt of young ladislaw’s.
but no word pass between him and dorothea about the 
part of the will; inde, both of them felt that the mention of 
between them would be imposs. sir jame wa shy, even with men,
about disagre subject; and the on thing that dorothea would 
chosen to sai, if she had spoken on the matter at all, wa forbidden 
her at present becaus it seem to be a further exposur of 
husband’s injustic. yet she did wish that sir jame could know 
had pass between her and her husband about will ladislaw’s 
claim on the properti: it would then, she thought, be appar to 
as it wa to her, that her husband’s strang indel proviso 
been chiefli urg by hi bitter resist to that idea of claim, 
not mere by person feel more difficult to talk about. also, 
must be admit, dorothea wish that thi could be known for will’
sake, sinc her friend seem to think of him as simpli an object 
mr. casaubon’s chariti. why should he be compar with an 
carri white mice? that word quot from mr. cadwallad seem 
a mock travesti wrought in the dark by an impish finger.

at lowick dorothea search desk and drawer—search all her husband’
place of deposit for privat write, but found no paper 
especi to her, except that “synopt tabul,” which 
probabl onli the begin of mani intend direct for 
guidanc. in carri out thi bequest of labor to dorothea, as in 
els, mr. casaubon had been slow and hesit, oppress in the 
of transmit hi work, as he had been in execut it, by the 
of move heavili in a dim and clog medium: distrust of dorothea’
compet to arrang what he had prepar wa subdu onli by 
of ani other redactor. but he had come at last to creat a trust 
himself out of dorothea’s natur: she could do what she resolv to do:
and he willingli imagin her toil under the fetter of a promis 
erect a tomb with hi name upon it. (not that mr. casaubon call 
futur volum a tomb; he call them the kei to all mytholog.) 
the month gain on him and left hi plan belat: he had onli 
time to ask for that promis by which he sought to keep hi cold 
on dorothea’s life.

the grasp had slip awai. bound by a pledg given from the depth 
her piti, she would have been capabl of undertak a toil which 
judgment whisper wa vain for all us except that consecr 
faith which is a suprem us. but now her judgment, instead 
be control by duteou devot, wa made activ by 
imbitt discoveri that in her past union there had lurk 
hidden alien of secreci and suspicion. the live, suffer 
wa no longer befor her to awaken her piti: there remain onli 
retrospect of pain subject to a husband whose thought had 
lower than she had believ, whose exorbit claim for himself 
even blind hi scrupul care for hi own charact, and made 
defeat hi own pride by shock men of ordinari honor. as for 
properti which wa the sign of that broken tie, she would have 
glad to be free from it and have noth more than her origin 
which had been settl on her, if there had not been duti attach 
ownership, which she ought not to flinch from. about thi properti 
troublou question insist on rise: had she not been right 
think that the half of it ought to go to will ladislaw?—but wa 
not imposs now for her to do that act of justic? mr. casaubon 
taken a cruelli effect mean of hinder her: even with 
against him in her heart, ani act that seem a triumphant elud 
hi purpos revolt her.

after collect paper of busi which she wish to examin, 
lock up again the desk and drawer—all empti of person word 
her—empti of ani sign that in her husband’s lone brood hi 
had gone out to her in excus or explan; and she went back 
freshitt with the sens that around hi last hard demand and hi 
injuri assert of hi power, the silenc wa unbroken.

dorothea tri now to turn her thought toward immedi duti, 
on of these wa of a kind which other were determin to remind 
of. lydgat’s ear had caught eagerli her mention of the live, and 
soon as he could, he reopen the subject, see here a possibl 
make amend for the cast-vote he had onc given with 
ill-satisfi conscienc. “instead of tell you anyth about mr.
tyke,” he said, “i should like to speak of anoth man—mr. farebroth,
the vicar of st. botolph’s. hi live is a poor on, and give him 
stint provis for himself and hi famili. hi mother, aunt, 
sister all live with him, and depend upon him. i believ he ha 
marri becaus of them. i never heard such good preach as hi—
plain, easi eloqu. he would have done to preach at st. paul’s 
after old latim. hi talk is just as good about all subject:
origin, simpl, clear. i think him a remark fellow: he ought 
have done more than he ha done.”

“why ha he not done more?” said dorothea, interest now in all 
had slip below their own intent.

“that’s a hard question,” said lydgat. “i find myself that it’
uncommonli difficult to make the right thing work: there ar so 
string pull at onc. farebroth often hint that he ha got 
the wrong profess; he want a wider rang than that of a 
clergyman, and i suppos he ha no interest to help him on. he is 
fond of natur histori and variou scientif matter, and he 
hamper in reconcil these tast with hi posit. he ha no 
to spare—hardli enough to us; and that ha led him 
card-plai—middlemarch is a great place for whist. he doe plai 
monei, and he win a good deal. of cours that take him into compani 
littl beneath him, and make him slack about some thing; and yet,
with all that, look at him as a whole, i think he is on of the 
blameless men i ever knew. he ha neither venom nor doubl in him,
and those often go with a more correct outsid.”

“i wonder whether he suffer in hi conscienc becaus of that habit,”
said dorothea; “i wonder whether he wish he could leav it off.”

“i have no doubt he would leav it off, if he were transplant 
plenti: he would be glad of the time for other thing.”

“my uncl sai that mr. tyke is spoken of as an apostol man,” 
dorothea, medit. she wa wish it were possibl to restor 
time of primit zeal, and yet think of mr. farebroth with 
strong desir to rescu him from hi chanc-gotten monei.

“i don’t pretend to sai that farebroth is apostol,” said lydgat.
“hi posit is not quit like that of the apostl: he is onli 
parson among parishion whose live he ha to try and make better.
practic i find that what is call be apostol now, is 
impati of everyth in which the parson doesn’t cut the 
figur. i see someth of that in mr. tyke at the hospit: a 
deal of hi doctrin is a sort of pinch hard to make 
uncomfort awar of him. besid, an apostol man at lowick!—
ought to think, as st. franci did, that it is need to preach to 
bird.”

“true,” said dorothea. “it is hard to imagin what sort of notion 
farmer and labor get from their teach. i have been look 
a volum of sermon by mr. tyke: such sermon would be of no us 
lowick—i mean, about imput righteous and the propheci in 
apocalyps. i have alwai been think of the differ wai in 
christian is taught, and whenev i find on wai that make it 
wider bless than ani other, i cling to that as the truest—i 
that which take in the most good of all kind, and bring in the 
peopl as sharer in it. it is sure better to pardon too much, 
to condemn too much. but i should like to see mr. farebroth and 
him preach.”

“do,” said lydgat; “i trust to the effect of that. he is veri 
belov, but he ha hi enemi too: there ar alwai peopl who can’
forgiv an abl man for differ from them. and that monei-
busi is realli a blot. you don’t, of cours, see mani 
peopl: but mr. ladislaw, who is constantli see mr. brook, is 
great friend of mr. farebroth’s old ladi, and would be glad to 
the vicar’s prais. on of the old ladi—miss nobl, the aunt—is 
wonderfulli quaint pictur of self-forget good, and 
gallant her about sometim. i met them on dai in a back street: 
know ladislaw’s look—a sort of daphni in coat and waistcoat; and 
littl old maid reach up to hi arm—thei look like a 
drop out of a romant comedi. but the best evid 
farebroth is to see him and hear him.”

happili dorothea wa in her privat sit-room when thi 
occur, and there wa no on present to make lydgat’s 
introduct of ladislaw pain to her. as wa usual with him 
matter of person gossip, lydgat had quit forgotten rosamond’
remark that she thought will ador mr. casaubon. at that moment 
wa onli care for what would recommend the farebroth famili; and 
had purpos given emphasi to the worst that could be said about 
vicar, in order to forestal object. in the week sinc mr.
casaubon’s death he had hardli seen ladislaw, and he had heard no 
to warn him that mr. brook’s confidenti secretari wa a 
subject with mr. casaubon. when he wa gone, hi pictur of 
linger in her mind and disput the ground with that question of 
lowick live. what wa will ladislaw think about her? would he 
of that fact which made her cheek burn as thei never us to do? 
how would he feel when he heard it?—but she could see as well 
possibl how he smile down at the littl old maid. an italian 
white mice!—on the contrari, he wa a creatur who enter into 
on’s feel, and could take the pressur of their thought instead 
urg hi own with iron resist.




chapter li.

parti is natur too, and you shall 
by forc of logic how thei both agre:
the mani in the on, the on in mani;
all is not some, nor some the same as ani:
genu hold speci, both ar great or small;
on genu highest, on not high at all;
each speci ha it differentia too,
thi is not that, and he wa never you,
though thi and that ar ay, and you and 
ar like as on to on, or three to three.


no gossip about mr. casaubon’s will had yet reach ladislaw: the 
seem to be fill with the dissolut of parliament and the 
elect, as the old wake and fair were fill with the rival 
of itiner show; and more privat nois were taken littl 
of. the famou “dry elect” wa at hand, in which the depth 
public feel might be measur by the low flood-mark of drink. 
ladislaw wa on of the busiest at thi time; and though dorothea’
widowhood wa continu in hi thought, he wa so far from wish 
be spoken to on the subject, that when lydgat sought him out to 
him what had pass about the lowick live, he answer 
waspishli—

“why should you bring me into the matter? i never see mr. casaubon,
and am not like to see her, sinc she is at freshitt. i never 
there. it is tori ground, where i and the ‘pioneer’ ar no more 
than a poacher and hi gun.”

the fact wa that will had been made the more suscept by 
that mr. brook, instead of wish him, as befor, to come to 
grang often than wa quit agreeabl to himself, seem now 
contriv that he should go there as littl as possibl. thi wa 
shuffl concess of mr. brook’s to sir jame chettam’s 
remonstr; and will, awak to the slightest hint in thi direct,
conclud that he wa to be kept awai from the grang on dorothea’
account. her friend, then, regard him with some suspicion? 
fear were quit superflu: thei were veri much mistaken if 
imagin that he would put himself forward as a needi adventur 
to win the favor of a rich woman.

until now will had never fulli seen the chasm between himself 
dorothea—until now that he wa come to the brink of it, and saw her 
the other side. he began, not without some inward rage, to think 
go awai from the neighborhood: it would be imposs for him 
show ani further interest in dorothea without subject himself 
disagre imput—perhap even in her mind, which other 
try to poison.

“we ar forev divid,” said will. “i might as well be at rome; 
would be no farther from me.” but what we call our despair is 
onli the pain eager of unf hope. there were plenti of 
why he should not go—public reason why he should not quit hi post 
thi crisi, leav mr. brook in the lurch when he need “coach”
for the elect, and when there wa so much canvass, direct 
indirect, to be carri on. will could not like to leav hi 
chessmen in the heat of a game; and ani candid on the right side,
even if hi brain and marrow had been as soft as wa consist with 
gentlemanli bear, might help to turn a major. to coach mr. 
and keep him steadili to the idea that he must pledg himself to 
for the actual reform bill, instead of insist on hi 
and power of pull up in time, wa not an easi task. mr.
farebroth’s propheci of a fourth candid “in the bag” had not 
been fulfil, neither the parliamentari candid societi nor 
other power on the watch to secur a reform major see a 
nodu for interfer while there wa a second reform 
like mr. brook, who might be return at hi own expens; and 
fight lai entir between pinkerton the old tori member, bagster 
new whig member return at the last elect, and brook the 
independ member, who wa to fetter himself for thi occas onli.
mr. hawlei and hi parti would bend all their forc to the return 
pinkerton, and mr. brook’s success must depend either on 
which would leav bagster in the rear, or on the new mint of 
vote into reform vote. the latter mean, of cours, would 
prefer.

thi prospect of convert vote wa a danger distract to mr.
brook: hi impress that waver were like to be allur 
waver statement, and also the liabil of hi mind to stick 
at oppos argument as thei turn up in hi memori, gave 
ladislaw much troubl.

“you know there ar tactic in these thing,” said mr. brook; “
peopl half-wai—temper your idea—sai, ‘well now, there’
someth in that,’ and so on. i agre with you that thi is a 
occas—the countri with a will of it own—polit union—that 
of thing—but we sometim cut with rather too sharp a knife, ladislaw.
these ten-pound household, now: why ten? draw the 
somewher—ye: but why just at ten? that’s a difficult question, now,
if you go into it.”

“of cours it is,” said will, impati. “but if you ar to wait 
we get a logic bill, you must put yourself forward as 
revolutionist, and then middlemarch would not elect you, i fanci. 
for trim, thi is not a time for trim.”

mr. brook alwai end by agre with ladislaw, who still 
to him a sort of burk with a leaven of shellei; but after an 
the wisdom of hi own method reassert itself, and he wa again 
into us them with much hope. at thi stage of affair he 
in excel spirit, which even support him under larg advanc 
monei; for hi power of convinc and persuad had not yet 
test by anyth more difficult than a chairman’s speech 
other orat, or a dialogu with a middlemarch voter, from which 
came awai with a sens that he wa a tactician by natur, and that 
wa a piti he had not gone earlier into thi kind of thing. he wa 
littl consciou of defeat, howev, with mr. mawmsei, a 
repres in middlemarch of that great social power, the 
trader, and natur on of the most doubt voter in 
borough—will for hi own part to suppli an equal qualiti of tea 
sugar to reform and anti-reform, as well as to agre 
with both, and feel like the burgess of old that thi necess 
elect member wa a great burthen to a town; for even if there 
no danger in hold out hope to all parti beforehand, there 
be the pain necess at last of disappoint respect 
whose name were on hi book. he wa accustom to receiv 
order from mr. brook of tipton; but then, there were mani 
pinkerton’s committe whose opinion had a great weight of groceri 
their side. mr. mawmsei think that mr. brook, as not too “clever 
hi intellect,” wa the more like to forgiv a grocer who gave 
hostil vote under pressur, had becom confidenti in hi 
parlor.

“as to reform, sir, put it in a famili light,” he said, rattl 
small silver in hi pocket, and smile affabl. “will it support mr.
mawmsei, and enabl her to bring up six children when i am no more? 
put the question _fictious_, know what must be the answer. 
well, sir. i ask you what, as a husband and a father, i am to do 
gentlemen come to me and sai, ‘do as you like, mawmsei; but if you 
against us, i shall get my groceri elsewher: when i sugar my 
i like to feel that i am benefit the countri by 
tradesmen of the right color.’ those veri word have been spoken to me,
sir, in the veri chair where you ar now sit. i don’t mean by 
honor self, mr. brook.”

“no, no, no—that’s narrow, you know. until my butler complain to me 
your good, mr. mawmsei,” said mr. brook, soothingli, “until i 
that you send bad sugar, spice—that sort of thing—i shall never 
him to go elsewher.”

“sir, i am your humbl servant, and greatli oblig,” said mr. mawmsei,
feel that polit were clear up a littl. “there would be 
pleasur in vote for a gentleman who speak in that 
manner.”

“well, you know, mr. mawmsei, you would find it the right thing to 
yourself on our side. thi reform will touch everybodi by-and-by—
thoroughli popular measur—a sort of a, b, c, you know, that must 
first befor the rest can follow. i quit agre with you that you’
got to look at the thing in a famili light: but public spirit, now.
we’re all on famili, you know—it’s all on cupboard. such a thing as 
vote, now: why, it mai help to make men’s fortun at the cape—there’
no know what mai be the effect of a vote,” mr. brook end, with 
sens of be a littl out at sea, though find it still enjoy.
but mr. mawmsei answer in a tone of decis check.

“i beg your pardon, sir, but i can’t afford that. when i give a vote 
must know what i am do; i must look to what will be the effect 
my till and ledger, speak respectfulli. price, i’ll admit, ar 
nobodi can know the merit of; and the sudden fall after you’ve 
in currant, which ar a good that will not keep—i’ve never; 
seen into the in and out there; which is a rebuk to human pride. 
as to on famili, there’s debtor and creditor, i hope; thei’re 
go to reform that awai; els i should vote for thing stai 
thei ar. few men have less need to cry for chang than i have,
person speak—that is, for self and famili. i am not on of 
who have noth to lose: i mean as to respect both in 
and privat busi, and nowai in respect of your honor self 
custom, which you wa good enough to sai you would not withdraw 
me, vote or no vote, while the articl sent in wa satisfactori.”

after thi convers mr. mawmsei went up and boast to hi 
that he had been rather too mani for brook of tipton, and that 
didn’t mind so much now about go to the poll.

mr. brook on thi occas abstain from boast of hi tactic 
ladislaw, who for hi part wa glad enough to persuad himself that 
had no concern with ani canvass except the pure 
sort, and that he work no meaner engin than knowledg. mr. brook,
necessarili, had hi agent, who understood the natur of 
middlemarch voter and the mean of enlist hi ignor on the 
of the bill—which were remark similar to the mean of enlist 
on the side against the bill. will stop hi ear. 
parliament, like the rest of our live, even to our eat and apparel,
could hardli go on if our imagin were too activ about process.
there were plenti of dirti-hand men in the world to do 
busi; and will protest to himself that hi share in bring mr.
brook through would be quit innoc.

but whether he should succe in that mode of contribut to 
major on the right side wa veri doubt to him. he had written 
variou speech and memoranda for speech, but he had begun 
perceiv that mr. brook’s mind, if it had the burthen of 
ani train of thought, would let it drop, run awai in search of it, 
not easili come back again. to collect document is on mode of 
your countri, and to rememb the content of a document is anoth.
no! the onli wai in which mr. brook could be coerc into think 
the right argument at the right time wa to be well pli with 
till thei took up all the room in hi brain. but here there wa 
difficulti of find room, so mani thing have been taken 
beforehand. mr. brook himself observ that hi idea stood rather 
hi wai when he wa speak.

howev, ladislaw’s coach wa forthwith to be put to the test, 
befor the dai of nomin mr. brook wa to explain himself to 
worthi elector of middlemarch from the balconi of the white hart,
which look out advantag at an angl of the market-place,
command a larg area in front and two converg street. it wa 
fine mai morn, and everyth seem hope: there wa 
prospect of an understand between bagster’s committe and brook’s,
to which mr. bulstrod, mr. standish as a liber lawyer, and 
manufactur as mr. plymdal and mr. vinci, gave a solid 
almost counterbalanc mr. hawlei and hi associ who sat 
pinkerton at the green dragon. mr. brook, consciou of have 
the blast of the “trumpet” against him, by hi reform as a 
in the last half year, and hear himself cheer a littl as he 
into the town, felt hi heart toler light under hi buff-
waistcoat. but with regard to critic occas, it often happen 
all moment seem comfort remot until the last.

“thi look well, eh?” said mr. brook as the crowd gather. “i 
have a good audienc, at ani rate. i like thi, now—thi kind of 
made up of on’s own neighbor, you know.”

the weaver and tanner of middlemarch, unlik mr. mawmsei, had 
thought of mr. brook as a neighbor, and were not more attach to 
than if he had been sent in a box from london. but thei 
without much disturb to the speaker who introduc the candid,
on of them—a polit personag from brass, who came to 
middlemarch it duti—spoke so fulli, that it wa alarm to think 
the candid could find to sai after him. meanwhil the crowd 
denser, and as the polit personag near the end of hi speech,
mr. brook felt a remark chang in hi sensat while he 
handl hi ey-glass, trifl with document befor him, and 
remark with hi committe, as a man to whom the moment of summon 
indiffer.

“i’ll take anoth glass of sherri, ladislaw,” he said, with an 
air, to will, who wa close behind him, and present hand him 
suppos fortifi. it wa ill-chosen; for mr. brook wa an 
man, and to drink a second glass of sherri quickli at no great 
from the first wa a surpris to hi system which tend to scatter 
energi instead of collect them. prai piti him: so mani 
gentlemen make themselv miser by speechifi on entir 
ground! wherea mr. brook wish to serv hi countri by stand 
parliament—which, inde, mai also be done on privat ground, 
be onc undertaken doe absolut demand some speechifi.

it wa not about the begin of hi speech that mr. brook wa at 
anxiou; thi, he felt sure, would be all right; he should have 
quit pat, cut out as neatli as a set of couplet from pope. 
would be easi, but the vision of open sea that might come after 
alarm. “and question, now,” hint the demon just wake up in 
stomach, “somebodi mai put question about the schedul.—ladislaw,” 
continu, aloud, “just hand me the memorandum of the schedul.”

when mr. brook present himself on the balconi, the cheer were 
loud enough to counterbal the yell, groan, brai, and 
express of advers theori, which were so moder that mr. 
(decidedli an old bird) observ in the ear next to him, “thi 
danger, by god! hawlei ha got some deeper plan than thi.” still,
the cheer were exhilar, and no candid could look more 
than mr. brook, with the memorandum in hi breast-pocket, hi 
hand on the rail of the balconi, and hi right trifl with 
ey-glass. the strike point in hi appear were hi 
waistcoat, short-clip blond hair, and neutral physiognomi. he 
with some confid.

“gentlemen—elector of middlemarch!”

thi wa so much the right thing that a littl paus after it 
natur.

“i’m uncommonli glad to be here—i wa never so proud and happi in 
life—never so happi, you know.”

thi wa a bold figur of speech, but not exactli the right thing; for,
unhappili, the pat open had slip awai—even couplet from pope 
be but “fall from us, vanish,” when fear clutch us, and 
glass of sherri is hurri like smoke among our idea. ladislaw, 
stood at the window behind the speaker, thought, “it’s all up now. 
onli chanc is that, sinc the best thing won’t alwai do, 
mai answer for onc.” mr. brook, meanwhil, have lost other clew,
fell back on himself and hi qualif—alwai an 
grace subject for a candid.

“i am a close neighbor of your, my good friend—you’ve known me on 
bench a good while—i’ve alwai gone a good deal into 
question—machineri, now, and machin-break—you’re mani of 
concern with machineri, and i’ve been go into that late. 
won’t do, you know, break machin: everyth must go on—trade,
manufactur, commerc, interchang of stapl—that kind of thing—
adam smith, that must go on. we must look all over 
globe:—‘observ with extens view,’ must look everywher, ‘
china to peru,’ as somebodi sai—johnson, i think, ‘the rambler,’ 
know. that is what i have done up to a certain point—not as far 
peru; but i’ve not alwai stai at home—i saw it wouldn’t do. i’
been in the levant, where some of your middlemarch good go—and then,
again, in the baltic. the baltic, now.”

ply among hi recollect in thi wai, mr. brook might have 
along, easili to himself, and would have come back from the 
sea without troubl; but a diabol procedur had been set up by 
enemi. at on and the same moment there had risen abov the 
of the crowd, nearli opposit mr. brook, and within ten yard of him,
the effigi of himself: buff-color waistcoat, ey-glass, and 
physiognomi, paint on rag; and there had arisen, appar in 
air, like the note of the cuckoo, a parrot-like, punch-voic echo 
hi word. everybodi look up at the open window in the hous at 
opposit angl of the converg street; but thei were either blank,
or fill by laugh listen. the most innoc echo ha an 
mockeri in it when it follow a grave persist speaker, and 
echo wa not at all innoc; if it did not follow with the 
of a natur echo, it had a wick choic of the word it overtook. 
the time it said, “the baltic, now,” the laugh which had been 
through the audienc becam a gener shout, and but for the 
effect of parti and that great public caus which the entangl 
thing had identifi with “brook of tipton,” the laugh might 
caught hi committe. mr. bulstrod ask, reprehens, what the 
polic wa do; but a voic could not well be collar, and an 
on the effigi of the candid would have been too equivoc, 
hawlei probabl meant it to be pelt.

mr. brook himself wa not in a posit to be quickli consciou 
anyth except a gener slip awai of idea within himself: he 
even a littl sing in the ear, and he wa the onli person who 
not yet taken distinct account of the echo or discern the imag 
himself. few thing hold the percept more thoroughli captiv 
anxieti about what we have got to sai. mr. brook heard the laughter;
but he had expect some tori effort at disturb, and he wa 
thi moment addition excit by the tickl, sting sens 
hi lost exordium wa come back to fetch him from the baltic.

“that remind me,” he went on, thrust a hand into hi side-pocket,
with an easi air, “if i want a preced, you know—but we never 
a preced for the right thing—but there is chatham, now; i can’t 
i should have support chatham, or pitt, the younger pitt—he wa not 
man of idea, and we want idea, you know.”

“blast your idea! we want the bill,” said a loud rough voic from 
crowd below.

immedi the invis punch, who had hitherto follow mr. brook,
repeat, “blast your idea! we want the bill.” the laugh wa 
than ever, and for the first time mr. brook be himself silent,
heard distinctli the mock echo. but it seem to ridicul 
interrupt, and in that light wa encourag; so he repli 
amen—

“there is someth in what you sai, my good friend, and what do 
meet for but to speak our mind—freedom of opinion, freedom of 
press, liberti—that kind of thing? the bill, now—you shall have 
bill”—here mr. brook paus a moment to fix on hi ey-glass and 
the paper from hi breast-pocket, with a sens of be practic 
come to particular. the invis punch follow:—

“you shall have the bill, mr. brook, per election contest, and 
seat outsid parliament as deliv, five thousand pound, 
shill, and fourpenc.”

mr. brook, amid the roar of laughter, turn red, let hi ey-
fall, and look about him confusedli, saw the imag of himself, 
had come nearer. the next moment he saw it dolor bespatt 
egg. hi spirit rose a littl, and hi voic too.

“buffooneri, trick, ridicul the test of truth—all that is 
well”—here an unpleas egg broke on mr. brook’s shoulder, as 
echo said, “all that is veri well;” then came a hail of egg, 
aim at the imag, but occasion hit the origin, as if 
chanc. there wa a stream of new men push among the crowd;
whistl, yell, bellow, and fife made all the greater 
becaus there wa shout and struggl to put them down. no 
would have had wing enough to rise abov the uproar, and mr. brook,
disagre anoint, stood hi ground no longer. the 
would have been less exasper if it had been less gamesom 
boyish: a seriou assault of which the newspap report “can 
that it endang the learn gentleman’s rib,” or can 
bear wit to “the sole of that gentleman’s boot have 
visibl abov the rail,” ha perhap more consol attach 
it.

mr. brook re-enter the committe-room, sai, as carelessli as 
could, “thi is a littl too bad, you know. i should have got the 
of the peopl by-and-by—but thei didn’t give me time. i should 
gone into the bill by-and-by, you know,” he ad, glanc 
ladislaw. “howev, thing will come all right at the nomin.”

but it wa not resolv unanim that thing would come right; 
the contrari, the committe look rather grim, and the 
personag from brass wa write busili, as if he were brew 
devic.

“it wa bowyer who did it,” said mr. standish, evas. “i know it 
well as if he had been advertis. he’s uncommonli good 
ventriloqu, and he did it uncommonli well, by god! hawlei ha 
have him to dinner late: there’s a fund of talent in bowyer.”

“well, you know, you never mention him to me, standish, els i 
have invit him to dine,” said poor mr. brook, who had gone through 
great deal of invit for the good of hi countri.

“there’s not a more paltri fellow in middlemarch than bowyer,” 
ladislaw, indignantli, “but it seem as if the paltri fellow 
alwai to turn the scale.”

will wa thoroughli out of temper with himself as well as with 
“princip,” and he went to shut himself in hi room with 
half-form resolv to throw up the “pioneer” and mr. brook togeth.
why should he stai? if the impass gulf between himself and 
were ever to be fill up, it must rather be by hi go awai 
get into a thoroughli differ posit than by stai here 
slip into deserv contempt as an understrapp of brook’s. 
came the young dream of wonder that he might do—in five year, 
exampl: polit write, polit speak, would get a 
valu now public life wa go to be wider and more nation, and 
might give him such distinct that he would not seem to be 
dorothea to step down to him. five year:—if he could onli be sure 
she care for him more than for other; if he could onli make her 
that he stood aloof until he could tell hi love without 
himself—then he could go awai easili, and begin a career which 
five-and-twenti seem probabl enough in the inward order of thing,
where talent bring fame, and fame everyth els which is delight.
he could speak and he could write; he could master ani subject if 
chose, and he meant alwai to take the side of reason and justic, 
which he would carri all hi ardor. why should he not on dai be 
abov the shoulder of the crowd, and feel that he had won 
emin well? without doubt he would leav middlemarch, go to town,
and make himself fit for celebr by “eat hi dinner.”

but not immedi: not until some kind of sign had pass between 
and dorothea. he could not be satisfi until she knew why, even if 
were the man she would choos to marri, he would not marri her. 
he must keep hi post and bear with mr. brook a littl longer.

but he soon had reason to suspect that mr. brook had anticip 
in the wish to break up their connect. deput without 
voic within had concur in induc that philanthropist to take 
stronger measur than usual for the good of mankind; name, 
withdraw in favor of anoth candid, to whom he left the 
of hi canvass machineri. he himself call thi a strong measur,
but observ that hi health wa less capabl of sustain 
than he had imagin.

“i have felt uneasi about the chest—it won’t do to carri that too far,”
he said to ladislaw in explain the affair. “i must pull up. 
casaubon wa a warn, you know. i’ve made some heavi advanc, 
i’ve dug a channel. it’s rather coars work—thi election, eh,
ladislaw? dare sai you ar tire of it. howev, we have dug a 
with the ‘pioneer’—put thing in a track, and so on. a more 
man than you might carri it on now—more ordinari, you know.”

“do you wish me to give it up?” said will, the quick color come 
hi face, as he rose from the write-tabl, and took a turn of 
step with hi hand in hi pocket. “i am readi to do so whenev 
wish it.”

“as to wish, my dear ladislaw, i have the highest opinion of 
power, you know. but about the ‘pioneer,’ i have been consult 
littl with some of the men on our side, and thei ar inclin to 
it into their hand—indemnifi me to a certain extent—carri it on, 
fact. and under the circumst, you might like to give up—might 
a better field. these peopl might not take that high view of you 
i have alwai taken, as an alter ego, a right hand—though i 
look forward to your do someth els. i think of have a 
into franc. but i’ll write you ani letter, you know—to althorp 
peopl of that kind. i’ve met althorp.”

“i am exceedingli oblig to you,” said ladislaw, proudli. “sinc 
ar go to part with the ‘pioneer,’ i need not troubl you about 
step i shall take. i mai choos to continu here for the present.”

after mr. brook had left him will said to himself, “the rest of 
famili have been urg him to get rid of me, and he doesn’t care 
about my go. i shall stai as long as i like. i shall go of my 
movement and not becaus thei ar afraid of me.”




chapter lii.

“hi 
the lowliest duti on itself did lai.”
—wordsworth.


on that june even when mr. farebroth knew that he wa to have 
lowick live, there wa joi in the old fashion parlor, and even 
portrait of the great lawyer seem to look on with satisfact. 
mother left her tea and toast untouch, but sat with her usual 
prim, onli show her emot by that flush in the cheek 
bright in the ey which give an old woman a touch 
ident with her far-off youth self, and sai decis—

“the greatest comfort, camden, is that you have deserv it.”

“when a man get a good berth, mother, half the deserv must 
after,” said the son, brim of pleasur, and not try to 
it. the glad in hi face wa of that activ kind which seem 
have energi enough not onli to flash outwardli, but to light up 
vision within: on seem to see thought, as well as delight, in 
glanc.

“now, aunt,” he went on, rub hi hand and look at miss nobl,
who wa make tender littl beaver-like nois, “there shall 
sugar-candi alwai on the tabl for you to steal and give to 
children, and you shall have a great mani new stock to 
present of, and you shall darn your own more than ever!”

miss nobl nod at her nephew with a subdu half-frighten laugh,
consciou of have alreadi drop an addit lump of sugar 
her basket on the strength of the new prefer.

“as for you, winni”—the vicar went on—“i shall make no difficulti 
your marri ani lowick bachelor—mr. solomon featherston, 
exampl, as soon as i find you ar in love with him.”

miss winifr, who had been look at her brother all the while 
cry heartili, which wa her wai of rejoic, smile through 
tear and said, “you must set me the exampl, cam: _you_ must 
now.”

“with all my heart. but who is in love with me? i am a seedi 
fellow,” said the vicar, rise, push hi chair awai and 
down at himself. “what do you sai, mother?”

“you ar a handsom man, camden: though not so fine a figur of a 
as your father,” said the old ladi.

“i wish you would marri miss garth, brother,” said miss winifr. “
would make us so live at lowick.”

“veri fine! you talk as if young women were ti up to be chosen, 
poultri at market; as if i had onli to ask and everybodi would 
me,” said the vicar, not care to specifi.

“we don’t want everybodi,” said miss winifr. “but _you_ would 
miss garth, mother, shouldn’t you?”

“my son’s choic shall be mine,” said mr. farebroth, with 
discret, “and a wife would be most welcom, camden. you will 
your whist at home when we go to lowick, and henrietta nobl never 
a whist-player.” (mr. farebroth alwai call her tini old sister 
that magnific name.)

“i shall do without whist now, mother.”

“why so, camden? in my time whist wa thought an undeni 
for a good churchman,” said mr. farebroth, innoc of the 
that whist had for her son, and speak rather sharpli, as at 
danger countenanc of new doctrin.

“i shall be too busi for whist; i shall have two parish,” said 
vicar, prefer not to discuss the virtu of that game.

he had alreadi said to dorothea, “i don’t feel bound to give up st.
botolph’s. it is protest enough against the plural thei want 
reform if i give somebodi els most of the monei. the stronger thing 
not to give up power, but to us it well.”

“i have thought of that,” said dorothea. “so far as self is concern,
i think it would be easier to give up power and monei than to 
them. it seem veri unfit that i should have thi patronag, yet 
felt that i ought not to let it be us by some on els instead 
me.”

“it is i who am bound to act so that you will not regret your power,”
said mr. farebroth.

hi wa on of the natur in which conscienc get the more 
when the yoke of life ceas to gall them. he made no displai 
humil on the subject, but in hi heart he felt rather asham 
hi conduct had shown lach which other who did not get 
were free from.

“i us often to wish i had been someth els than a clergyman,” 
said to lydgat, “but perhap it will be better to try and make as 
a clergyman out of myself as i can. that is the well-benef point 
view, you perceiv, from which difficulti ar much simplifi,” 
end, smile.

the vicar did feel then as if hi share of duti would be easi. 
duti ha a trick of behav unexpectedli—someth like a heavi 
whom we have amiabl ask to visit us, and who break hi leg 
our gate.

hardli a week later, duti present itself in hi studi under 
disguis of fred vinci, now return from omnibu colleg with 
bachelor’s degre.

“i am asham to troubl you, mr. farebroth,” said fred, whose 
open face wa propiti, “but you ar the onli friend i can consult.
i told you everyth onc befor, and you were so good that i can’
help come to you again.”

“sit down, fred, i’m readi to hear and do anyth i can,” said 
vicar, who wa busi pack some small object for remov, and went 
with hi work.

“i want to tell you—” fred hesit an instant and then went 
plungingli, “i might go into the church now; and realli, look where 
mai, i can’t see anyth els to do. i don’t like it, but i know it’
uncommonli hard on my father to sai so, after he ha spent a good 
of monei in educ me for it.” fred paus again an instant, 
then repeat, “and i can’t see anyth els to do.”

“i did talk to your father about it, fred, but i made littl wai 
him. he said it wa too late. but you have got over on bridg now:
what ar your other difficulti?”

“mere that i don’t like it. i don’t like divin, and preach, 
feel oblig to look seriou. i like ride across countri, 
do as other men do. i don’t mean that i want to be a bad fellow 
ani wai; but i’ve no tast for the sort of thing peopl expect of 
clergyman. and yet what els am i to do? my father can’t spare me 
capit, els i might go into farm. and he ha no room for me in 
trade. and of cours i can’t begin to studi for law or physic now, 
my father want me to earn someth. it’s all veri well to sai i’
wrong to go into the church; but those who sai so might as well tell 
to go into the backwood.”

fred’s voic had taken a tone of grumbl remonstr, and mr.
farebroth might have been inclin to smile if hi mind had not 
too busi in imagin more than fred told him.

“have you ani difficulti about doctrin—about the articl?” 
said, try hard to think of the question simpli for fred’s sake.

“no; i suppos the articl ar right. i am not prepar with 
argument to disprov them, and much better, clever fellow than i 
go in for them entir. i think it would be rather ridicul in me 
urg scrupl of that sort, as if i were a judg,” said fred, 
simpli.

“i suppos, then, it ha occur to you that you might be a 
parish priest without be much of a divin?”

“of cours, if i am oblig to be a clergyman, i shall try and do 
duti, though i mayn’t like it. do you think ani bodi ought to 
me?”

“for go into the church under the circumst? that depend 
your conscienc, fred—how far you have count the cost, and seen 
your posit will requir of you. i can onli tell you about myself,
that i have alwai been too lax, and have been uneasi in consequ.”

“but there is anoth hindranc,” said fred, color. “i did not 
you befor, though perhap i mai have said thing that made you 
it. there is somebodi i am veri fond of: i have love her ever sinc 
were children.”

“miss garth, i suppos?” said the vicar, examin some label 
close.

“ye. i shouldn’t mind anyth if she would have me. and i know 
could be a good fellow then.”

“and you think she return the feel?”

“she never will sai so; and a good while ago she made me promis not 
speak to her about it again. and she ha set her mind 
against my be a clergyman; i know that. but i can’t give her up. 
do think she care about me. i saw mr. garth last night, and she 
that mari wa stai at lowick rectori with miss farebroth.”

“ye, she is veri kindli help my sister. do you wish to go there?”

“no, i want to ask a great favor of you. i am asham to bother you 
thi wai; but mari might listen to what you said, if you mention 
subject to her—i mean about my go into the church.”

“that is rather a delic task, my dear fred. i shall have 
presuppos your attach to her; and to enter on the subject as 
wish me to do, will be ask her to tell me whether she return it.”

“that is what i want her to tell you,” said fred, bluntli. “i don’
know what to do, unless i can get at her feel.”

“you mean that you would be guid by that as to your go into 
church?”

“if mari said she would never have me i might as well go wrong in 
wai as anoth.”

“that is nonsens, fred. men outliv their love, but thei don’t 
the consequ of their reckless.”

“not my sort of love: i have never been without love mari. if i 
to give her up, it would be like begin to live on wooden leg.”

“will she not be hurt at my intrus?”

“no, i feel sure she will not. she respect you more than ani on, 
she would not put you off with fun as she doe me. of cours i 
not have told ani on els, or ask ani on els to speak to her, 
you. there is no on els who could be such a friend to both of us.”
fred paus a moment, and then said, rather complainingli, “and 
ought to acknowledg that i have work in order to pass. she ought 
believ that i would exert myself for her sake.”

there wa a moment’s silenc befor mr. farebroth laid down hi work,
and put out hi hand to fred said—

“veri well, my boi. i will do what you wish.”

that veri dai mr. farebroth went to lowick parsonag on the nag 
he had just set up. “decidedli i am an old stalk,” he thought, “
young growth ar push me asid.”

he found mari in the garden gather rose and sprinkl the 
on a sheet. the sun wa low, and tall tree sent their shadow 
the grassi walk where mari wa move without bonnet or parasol. 
did not observ mr. farebroth’s approach along the grass, and 
just stoop down to lectur a small black-and-tan terrier, which 
persist in walk on the sheet and smell at the rose-leav as 
sprinkl them. she took hi fore-paw in on hand, and lift up 
forefing of the other, while the dog wrinkl hi brow and 
embarrass. “fly, fly, i am asham of you,” mari wa sai in 
grave contralto. “thi is not becom in a sensibl dog; anybodi 
think you were a silli young gentleman.”

“you ar unmerci to young gentlemen, miss garth,” said the vicar,
within two yard of her.

mari start up and blush. “it alwai answer to reason with fly,”
she said, laughingli.

“but not with young gentlemen?”

“oh, with some, i suppos; sinc some of them turn into excel men.”

“i am glad of that admiss, becaus i want at thi veri moment 
interest you in a young gentleman.”

“not a silli on, i hope,” said mari, begin to pluck the 
again, and feel her heart beat uncomfort.

“no; though perhap wisdom is not hi strong point, but 
affect and sincer. howev, wisdom li more in those 
qualiti than peopl ar apt to imagin. i hope you know by 
mark what young gentleman i mean.”

“ye, i think i do,” said mari, brave, her face get more seriou,
and her hand cold; “it must be fred vinci.”

“he ha ask me to consult you about hi go into the church. i 
you will not think that i consent to take a liberti in promis 
do so.”

“on the contrari, mr. farebroth,” said mari, give up the rose, 
fold her arm, but unabl to look up, “whenev you have anyth 
sai to me i feel honor.”

“but befor i enter on that question, let me just touch a point 
which your father took me into confid; by the wai, it wa that 
even on which i onc befor fulfil a mission from fred, 
after he had gone to colleg. mr. garth told me what happen on 
night of featherston’s death—how you refus to burn the will; and 
said that you had some heart-prick on that subject, becaus you 
been the innoc mean of hinder fred from get hi ten 
pound. i have kept that in mind, and i have heard someth that 
reliev you on that score—mai show you that no sin-offer is 
from you there.”

mr. farebroth paus a moment and look at mari. he meant to 
fred hi full advantag, but it would be well, he thought, to clear 
mind of ani superstit, such as women sometim follow when thei 
a man the wrong of marri him as an act of aton. mari’s 
had begun to burn a littl, and she wa mute.

“i mean, that your action made no real differ to fred’s lot. i 
that the first will would not have been legal good after the 
of the last; it would not have stood if it had been disput, and 
mai be sure it would have been disput. so, on that score, you 
feel your mind free.”

“thank you, mr. farebroth,” said mari, earnestli. “i am grate 
you for rememb my feel.”

“well, now i mai go on. fred, you know, ha taken hi degre. he 
work hi wai so far, and now the question is, what is he to do? 
question is so difficult that he is inclin to follow hi father’
wish and enter the church, though you know better than i do that 
wa quit set against that formerli. i have question him on 
subject, and i confess i see no insuper object to hi be 
clergyman, as thing go. he sai that he could turn hi mind to 
hi best in that vocat, on on condit. if that condit 
fulfil i would do my utmost in help fred on. after a time—not, 
cours, at first—he might be with me as my curat, and he would have 
much to do that hi stipend would be nearli what i us to get 
vicar. but i repeat that there is a condit without which all 
good cannot come to pass. he ha open hi heart to me, miss garth,
and ask me to plead for him. the condit li entir in 
feel.”

mari look so much move, that he said after a moment, “let us walk 
littl;” and when thei were walk he ad, “to speak quit plainli,
fred will not take ani cours which would lessen the chanc that 
would consent to be hi wife; but with that prospect, he will try 
best at anyth you approv.”

“i cannot possibl sai that i will ever be hi wife, mr. farebroth:
but i certainli never will be hi wife if he becom a clergyman. 
you sai is most gener and kind; i don’t mean for a moment to 
your judgment. it is onli that i have my girlish, mock wai 
look at thing,” said mari, with a return sparkl of 
in her answer which onli made it modesti more charm.

“he wish me to report exactli what you think,” said mr. farebroth.

“i could not love a man who is ridicul,” said mari, not choos 
go deeper. “fred ha sens and knowledg enough to make 
respect, if he like, in some good worldli busi, but i 
never imagin him preach and exhort, and pronounc bless,
and prai by the sick, without feel as if i were look at 
caricatur. hi be a clergyman would be onli for gentil’s sake,
and i think there is noth more contempt than such 
gentil. i us to think that of mr. crows, with hi empti face 
neat umbrella, and minc littl speech. what right have such men 
repres christian—as if it were an institut for get 
idiot genteelli—as if—” mari check herself. she had been 
along as if she had been speak to fred instead of mr. farebroth.

“young women ar sever: thei don’t feel the stress of action as 
do, though perhap i ought to make you an except there. but 
don’t put fred vinci on so low a level as that?”

“no, inde, he ha plenti of sens, but i think he would not show 
as a clergyman. he would be a piec of profession affect.”

“then the answer is quit decid. as a clergyman he could have 
hope?”

mari shook her head.

“but if he brave all the difficulti of get hi bread in 
other wai—will you give him the support of hope? mai he count 
win you?”

“i think fred ought not to need tell again what i have alreadi 
to him,” mari answer, with a slight resent in her manner. “i 
that he ought not to put such question until he ha done 
worthi, instead of sai that he could do it.”

mr. farebroth wa silent for a minut or more, and then, as 
turn and paus under the shadow of a mapl at the end of a 
walk, said, “i understand that you resist ani attempt to fetter you,
but either your feel for fred vinci exclud your 
anoth attach, or it doe not: either he mai count on 
remain singl until he shall have earn your hand, or he mai in 
case be disappoint. pardon me, mari—you know i us to catechis 
under that name—but when the state of a woman’s affect touch 
happi of anoth life—of more live than on—i think it would 
the nobler cours for her to be perfectli direct and open.”

mari in her turn wa silent, wonder not at mr. farebroth’s 
but at hi tone, which had a grave restrain emot in it. when 
strang idea flash across her that hi word had refer 
himself, she wa incredul, and asham of entertain it. she 
never thought that ani man could love her except fred, who had 
her with the umbrella ring, when she wore sock and littl 
shoe; still less that she could be of ani import to mr.
farebroth, the cleverest man in her narrow circl. she had onli 
to feel that all thi wa hazi and perhap illusori; but on thing 
clear and determin—her answer.

“sinc you think it my duti, mr. farebroth, i will tell you that 
have too strong a feel for fred to give him up for ani on els. 
should never be quit happi if i thought he wa unhappi for the loss 
me. it ha taken such deep root in me—my gratitud to him for 
love me best, and mind so much if i hurt myself, from the 
when we were veri littl. i cannot imagin ani new feel come 
make that weaker. i should like better than anyth to see him 
of everi on’s respect. but pleas tell him i will not promis to 
him till then: i should shame and griev my father and mother. he 
free to choos some on els.”

“then i have fulfil my commiss thoroughli,” said mr. farebroth,
put out hi hand to mari, “and i shall ride back to 
forthwith. with thi prospect befor him, we shall get fred into 
right nich somehow, and i hope i shall live to join your hand. 
bless you!”

“oh, pleas stai, and let me give you some tea,” said mari. her 
fill with tear, for someth indefin, someth like 
resolut suppress of a pain in mr. farebroth’s manner, made 
feel suddenli miser, as she had onc felt when she saw her father’
hand trembl in a moment of troubl.

“no, my dear, no. i must get back.”

in three minut the vicar wa on horseback again, have 
magnanim through a duti much harder than the renunci 
whist, or even than the write of penitenti medit.




chapter liii.

it is but a shallow hast which concludeth insincer from 
outsid call inconsist—put a dead mechan of “if” 
“therefor” for the live myriad of hidden sucker wherebi the 
and the conduct ar wrought into mutual sustain.


mr. bulstrod, when he wa hope to acquir a new interest in lowick,
had natur had an especi wish that the new clergyman should be 
whom he thoroughli approv; and he believ it to be a 
and admonit direct to hi own shortcom and those of the 
at larg, that just about the time when he came in possess of 
deed which made him the proprietor of stone court, mr. 
“read himself” into the quaint littl church and preach hi 
sermon to the congreg of farmer, labor, and villag artisan.
it wa not that mr. bulstrod intend to frequent lowick church or 
resid at stone court for a good while to come: he had bought 
excel farm and fine homestead simpli as a retreat which he 
gradual enlarg as to the land and beautifi as to the dwell, 
it should be conduc to the divin glori that he should enter on 
as a resid, partial withdraw from hi present exert in 
administr of busi, and throw more conspicu on the 
of gospel truth the weight of local land proprietorship, 
provid might increas by unforeseen occas of purchas. a 
lead in thi direct seem to have been given in the 
facil of get stone court, when everi on had expect that mr.
rigg featherston would have clung to it as the garden of eden. 
wa what poor old peter himself had expect; have often, 
imagin, look up through the sod abov him, and, unobstruct 
perspect, seen hi frog-face legate enjoi the fine old place 
the perpetu surpris and disappoint of other survivor.

but how littl we know what would make paradis for our neighbor! 
judg from our own desir, and our neighbor themselv ar not 
open enough even to throw out a hint of their. the cool and 
joshua rigg had not allow hi parent to perceiv that stone court 
anyth less than the chief good in hi estim, and he 
certainli wish to call it hi own. but as warren hast look 
gold and thought of bui daylesford, so joshua rigg look at 
court and thought of bui gold. he had a veri distinct and 
vision of hi chief good, the vigor greed which he had 
have taken a special form by dint of circumst: and hi chief 
wa to be a moneychang. from hi earliest employ as an errand-
in a seaport, he had look through the window of the moneychang 
other boi look through the window of the pastri-cook; 
fascin had wrought itself gradual into a deep special passion;
he meant, when he had properti, to do mani thing, on of them be 
marri a genteel young person; but these were all accid and 
that imagin could dispens with. the on joi after which hi 
thirst wa to have a monei-changer’s shop on a much-frequent quai,
to have lock all round him of which he held the kei, and to 
sublim cool as he handl the breed coin of all nation, 
helpless cupid look at him envious from the other side of 
iron lattic. the strength of that passion had been a power 
him to master all the knowledg necessari to gratifi it. and 
other were think that he had settl at stone court for life,
joshua himself wa think that the moment now wa not far off when 
should settl on the north quai with the best appoint in safe 
lock.

enough. we ar concern with look at joshua rigg’s sale of hi 
from mr. bulstrod’s point of view, and he interpret it as a 
dispens convei perhap a sanction to a purpos which he had 
some time entertain without extern encourag; he interpret 
thu, but not too confid, offer up hi thanksgiv in 
phraseolog. hi doubt did not aris from the possibl relat 
the event to joshua rigg’s destini, which belong to the 
region not taken under the providenti govern, except perhap 
an imperfect coloni wai; but thei aros from reflect that 
dispens too might be a chastis for himself, as mr.
farebroth’s induct to the live clearli wa.

thi wa not what mr. bulstrod said to ani man for the sake 
deceiv him: it wa what he said to himself—it wa as genuin 
mode of explain event as ani theori of your mai be, if you 
to disagre with him. for the egoism which enter into our 
doe not affect their sincer; rather, the more our egoism 
satisfi, the more robust is our belief.

howev, whether for sanction or for chastis, mr. bulstrod,
hardli fifteen month after the death of peter featherston, had 
the proprietor of stone court, and what peter would sai “if he 
worthi to know,” had becom an inexhaust and consolatori subject 
convers to hi disappoint rel. the tabl were now 
on that dear brother depart, and to contempl the frustrat 
hi cun by the superior cun of thing in gener wa a cud 
delight to solomon. mr. waul had a melancholi triumph in the 
that it did not answer to make fals featherston and cut off 
genuin; and sister martha receiv the new in the chalki flat said,
“dear, dear! then the almighti could have been none so pleas with 
almshous after all.”

affection mr. bulstrod wa particularli glad of the 
which her husband’s health wa like to get from the purchas of 
court. few dai pass without hi ride thither and look over 
part of the farm with the bailiff, and the even were delici 
that quiet spot, when the new hai-rick late set up were 
forth odor to mingl with the breath of the rich old garden. 
even, while the sun wa still abov the horizon and burn 
golden lamp among the great walnut bough, mr. bulstrod wa 
on horseback outsid the front gate wait for caleb garth, who 
met him by appoint to give an opinion on a question of 
drainag, and wa now advis the bailiff in the rick-yard.

mr. bulstrod wa consciou of be in a good spiritu frame and 
than usual seren, under the influenc of hi innoc recreat. 
wa doctrin convinc that there wa a total absenc of merit 
himself; but that doctrin convict mai be held without pain 
the sens of demerit doe not take a distinct shape in memori 
reviv the tingl of shame or the pang of remors. nai, it mai 
held with intens satisfact when the depth of our sin is but 
measur for the depth of forgiv, and a clench proof that we 
peculiar instrument of the divin intent. the memori ha as 
mood as the temper, and shift it sceneri like a diorama. at 
moment mr. bulstrod felt as if the sunshin were all on with that 
far-off even when he wa a veri young man and us to go 
preach beyond highburi. and he would willingli have had that 
of exhort in prospect now. the text were there still, and so 
hi own facil in expound them. hi brief reveri wa 
by the return of caleb garth, who also wa on horseback, and wa 
shake hi bridl befor start, when he exclaim—

“bless my heart! what’s thi fellow in black come along the lane?
he’s like on of those men on see about after the race.”

mr. bulstrod turn hi hors and look along the lane, but made 
repli. the comer wa our slight acquaint mr. raffl, 
appear present no other chang than such as wa due to a suit 
black and a crape hat-band. he wa within three yard of the 
now, and thei could see the flash of recognit in hi face as 
whirl hi stick upward, look all the while at mr. bulstrod, 
at last exclaim:—

“by jove, nick, it’s you! i couldn’t be mistaken, though 
five-and-twenti year have plai old bogui with us both! how ar you,
eh? you didn’t expect to see _me_ here. come, shake us by the hand.” 
sai that mr. raffl’ manner wa rather excit would be onli on 
of sai that it wa even. caleb garth could see that there wa 
moment of struggl and hesit in mr. bulstrod, but it end in 
put out hi hand coldli to raffl and sai—

“i did not inde expect to see you in thi remot countri place.”

“well, it belong to a stepson of mine,” said raffl, 
himself in a swagger attitud. “i came to see him here befor. i’
not so surpris at see you, old fellow, becaus i pick up 
letter—what you mai call a providenti thing. it’s 
fortun i met you, though; for i don’t care about see my stepson:
he’s not affection, and hi poor mother’s gone now. to tell 
truth, i came out of love to you, nick: i came to get your address,
for—look here!” raffl drew a crumpl paper from hi pocket.

almost ani other man than caleb garth might have been tempt to 
on the spot for the sake of hear all he could about a man 
acquaint with bulstrod seem to impli passag in the banker’
life so unlik anyth that wa known of him in middlemarch that 
must have the natur of a secret to piqu curios. but caleb 
peculiar: certain human tendenc which ar commonli strong 
almost absent from hi mind; and on of these wa curios 
person affair. especi if there wa anyth discredit to 
found out concern anoth man, caleb prefer not to know it; 
if he had to tell anybodi under him that hi evil do 
discov, he wa more embarrass than the culprit. he now 
hi hors, and sai, “i wish you good even, mr. bulstrod; i 
be get home,” set off at a trot.

“you didn’t put your full address to thi letter,” raffl continu.
“that wa not like the first-rate man of busi you us to be. ‘
shrub,’—thei mai be anywher: you live near at hand, eh?—have cut 
london concern altogeth—perhap turn countri squir—have a 
mansion to invit me to. lord, how mani year it is ago! the old 
must have been dead a pretti long while—gone to glori without the 
of know how poor her daughter wa, eh? but, by jove! you’re 
pale and pasti, nick. come, if you’re go home, i’ll walk by 
side.”

mr. bulstrod’s usual pale had in fact taken an almost deathli hue.
five minut befor, the expans of hi life had been submerg in 
even sunshin which shone backward to it rememb morn: 
seem to be a question of doctrin and inward penit, 
an exercis of the closet, the bear of hi deed a matter of 
vision adjust sole by spiritu relat and concept of 
divin purpos. and now, as if by some hideou magic, thi loud 
figur had risen befor him in unmanag solid—an 
past which had not enter into hi imagin of chastis. 
mr. bulstrod’s thought wa busi, and he wa not a man to act or 
rashli.

“i wa go home,” he said, “but i can defer my ride a littl. and 
can, if you pleas, rest here.”

“thank you,” said raffl, make a grimac. “i don’t care now 
see my stepson. i’d rather go home with you.”

“your stepson, if mr. rigg featherston wa he, is here no longer. i 
master here now.”

raffl open wide ey, and gave a long whistl of surpris, 
he said, “well then, i’ve no object. i’ve had enough walk 
the coach-road. i never wa much of a walker, or rider either. what 
like is a smart vehicl and a spirit cob. i wa alwai a littl 
in the saddl. what a pleasant surpris it must be to you to see me,
old fellow!” he continu, as thei turn toward the hous. “you don’
sai so; but you never took your luck heartili—you were alwai 
of improv the occas—you’d such a gift for improv your luck.”

mr. raffl seem greatli to enjoi hi own wit, and swung hi leg in 
swagger manner which wa rather too much for hi companion’
judici patienc.

“if i rememb rightli,” mr. bulstrod observ, with chill anger, “
acquaint mani year ago had not the sort of intimaci which you 
now assum, mr. raffl. ani servic you desir of me will be 
more readili render if you will avoid a tone of familiar which 
not lie in our former intercours, and can hardli be warrant by 
than twenti year of separ.”

“you don’t like be call nick? why, i alwai call you nick in 
heart, and though lost to sight, to memori dear. by jove! my 
have ripen for you like fine old cognac. i hope you’ve got some 
the hous now. josh fill my flask well the last time.”

mr. bulstrod had not yet fulli learn that even the desir for 
wa not stronger in raffl than the desir to torment, and that a 
of annoy alwai serv him as a fresh cue. but it wa at 
clear that further object wa useless, and mr. bulstrod, in 
order to the housekeep for the accommod of the guest, had 
resolut air of quietud.

there wa the comfort of think that thi housekeep had been in 
servic of rigg also, and might accept the idea that mr. 
entertain raffl mere as a friend of her former master.

when there wa food and drink spread befor hi visitor in 
wainscot parlor, and no wit in the room, mr. bulstrod said—

“your habit and mine ar so differ, mr. raffl, that we can 
enjoi each other’s societi. the wisest plan for both of us 
therefor be to part as soon as possibl. sinc you sai that you 
to meet me, you probabl consid that you had some busi 
transact with me. but under the circumst i will invit you 
remain here for the night, and i will myself ride over here 
to-morrow morn—befor breakfast, in fact—when i can receiv 
commun you have to make to me.”

“with all my heart,” said raffl; “thi is a comfort place—
littl dull for a continu; but i can put up with it for a night,
with thi good liquor and the prospect of see you again in 
morn. you’re a much better host than my stepson wa; but josh 
me a bit of a grudg for marri hi mother; and between you and 
there wa never anyth but kind.”

mr. bulstrod, hope that the peculiar mixtur of jovial 
sneer in raffl’ manner wa a good deal the effect of drink, 
determin to wait till he wa quit sober befor he spent more 
upon him. but he rode home with a terribl lucid vision of 
difficulti there would be in arrang ani result that could 
perman count on with thi man. it wa inevit that he 
wish to get rid of john raffl, though hi reappear could not 
regard as ly outsid the divin plan. the spirit of evil 
have sent him to threaten mr. bulstrod’s subvers as an 
of good; but the threat must have been permit, and wa 
chastis of a new kind. it wa an hour of anguish for him 
differ from the hour in which hi struggl had been 
privat, and which had end with a sens that hi secret misde 
pardon and hi servic accept. those misde even 
commit—had thei not been half sanctifi by the singl of 
desir to devot himself and all he possess to the further of 
divin scheme? and wa he after all to becom a mere stone of 
and a rock of offenc? for who would understand the work within him?
who would not, when there wa the pretext of cast disgrac upon him,
confound hi whole life and the truth he had espous, in on heap 
obloqui?

in hi closest medit the life-long habit of mr. bulstrod’s 
clad hi most egoist terror in doctrin refer to 
end. but even while we ar talk and medit about the earth’
orbit and the solar system, what we feel and adjust our movement to 
the stabl earth and the chang dai. and now within all the 
success of theoret phrase—distinct and inmost as the shiver 
the ach of oncom fever when we ar discuss abstract pain, 
the forecast of disgrac in the presenc of hi neighbor and of 
own wife. for the pain, as well as the public estim of disgrac,
depend on the amount of previou profess. to men who onli aim 
escap feloni, noth short of the prison’s dock is disgrac. 
mr. bulstrod had aim at be an emin christian.

it wa not more than half-past seven in the morn when he 
reach stone court. the fine old place never look more like 
delight home than at that moment; the great white lili were 
flower, the nasturtium, their pretti leav all silver with dew,
were run awai over the low stone wall; the veri nois all 
had a heart of peac within them. but everyth wa spoil for 
owner as he walk on the gravel in front and await the descent 
mr. raffl, with whom he wa condemn to breakfast.

it wa not long befor thei were seat togeth in the 
parlor over their tea and toast, which wa as much as raffl care 
take at that earli hour. the differ between hi morn and 
self wa not so great as hi companion had imagin that it might be;
the delight in torment wa perhap even the stronger becaus 
spirit were rather less highli pitch. certainli hi manner 
more disagre by the morn light.

“as i have littl time to spare, mr. raffl,” said the banker, 
could hardli do more than sip hi tea and break hi toast 
eat it, “i shall be oblig if you will mention at onc the 
on which you wish to meet with me. i presum that you have a 
elsewher and will be glad to return to it.”

“why, if a man ha got ani heart, doesn’t he want to see an old friend,
nick?—i must call you nick—we alwai did call you young nick when 
knew you meant to marri the old widow. some said you had a 
famili like to old nick, but that wa your mother’s fault, 
you nichola. aren’t you glad to see me again? i expect an invit 
stai with you at some pretti place. my own establish is broken 
now my wife’s dead. i’ve no particular attach to ani spot; i 
as soon settl hereabout as anywher.”

“mai i ask why you return from america? i consid that the 
wish you express to go there, when an adequ sum wa furnish, 
tantamount to an engag that you would remain there for life.”

“never knew that a wish to go to a place wa the same thing as a 
to stai. but i did stai a matter of ten year; it didn’t suit me 
stai ani longer. and i’m not go again, nick.” here mr. 
wink slowli as he look at mr. bulstrod.

“do you wish to be settl in ani busi? what is your call now?”

“thank you, my call is to enjoi myself as much as i can. i don’
care about work ani more. if i did anyth it would be a 
travel in the tobacco line—or someth of that sort, which take 
man into agreeabl compani. but not without an independ to 
back upon. that’s what i want: i’m not so strong as i wa, nick, 
i’ve got more color than you. i want an independ.”

“that could be suppli to you, if you would engag to keep at 
distanc,” said mr. bulstrod, perhap with a littl too much 
in hi underton.

“that must be as it suit my conveni,” said raffl coolli. “i 
no reason why i shouldn’t make a few acquaint hereabout. i’m 
asham of myself as compani for anybodi. i drop my portmanteau 
the turnpik when i got down—chang of linen—genuin—honor bright—
than front and wristband; and with thi suit of mourn, strap 
everyth, i should do you credit among the nob here.” mr. 
had push awai hi chair and look down at himself, particularli 
hi strap. hi chief intent wa to annoi bulstrod, but he 
thought that hi appear now would produc a good effect, and 
he wa not onli handsom and witti, but clad in a mourn style 
impli solid connect.

“if you intend to reli on me in ani wai, mr. raffl,” said bulstrod,
after a moment’s paus, “you will expect to meet my wish.”

“ah, to be sure,” said raffl, with a mock cordial. “didn’t 
alwai do it? lord, you made a pretti thing out of me, and i got 
littl. i’ve often thought sinc, i might have done better by 
the old woman that i’d found her daughter and her grandchild: it 
have suit my feel better; i’ve got a soft place in my heart. 
you’ve buri the old ladi by thi time, i suppos—it’s all on to 
now. and you’ve got your fortun out of that profit busi 
had such a bless on it. you’ve taken to be a nob, bui land,
be a countri bashaw. still in the dissent line, eh? still godli?
or taken to the church as more genteel?”

thi time mr. raffl’ slow wink and slight protrus of hi 
wa wors than a nightmar, becaus it held the certitud that it 
not a nightmar, but a wake miseri. mr. bulstrod felt a 
nausea, and did not speak, but wa consid dilig whether 
should not leav raffl to do as he would, and simpli defi him as 
slander. the man would soon show himself disreput enough to 
peopl disbeliev him. “but not when he tell ani ugli-look 
about _you_,” said discern conscious. and again: it seem 
wrong to keep raffl at a distanc, but mr. bulstrod shrank from 
direct falsehood of deni true statement. it wa on thing to 
back on forgiven sin, nai, to explain question conform to 
custom, and anoth to enter deliber on the necess 
falsehood.

but sinc bulstrod did not speak, raffl ran on, by wai of us 
to the utmost.

“i’ve not had such fine luck as you, by jove! thing went 
with me in new york; those yanke ar cool hand, and a man 
gentlemanli feel ha no chanc with them. i marri when i 
back—a nice woman in the tobacco trade—veri fond of me—but the 
wa restrict, as we sai. she had been settl there a good mani 
by a friend; but there wa a son too much in the case. josh and i 
hit it off. howev, i made the most of the posit, and i’ve 
taken my glass in good compani. it’s been all on the squar with me;
i’m as open as the dai. you won’t take it ill of me that i didn’t 
you up befor. i’ve got a complaint that make me a littl dilatori. 
thought you were trade and prai awai in london still, and didn’
find you there. but you see i wa sent to you, nick—perhap for 
bless to both of us.”

mr. raffl end with a jocos snuffl: no man felt hi intellect 
superior to religi cant. and if the cun which calcul on 
meanest feel in men could be call intellect, he had hi share,
for under the blurt ralli tone with which he spoke to bulstrod,
there wa an evid select of statement, as if thei had been 
mani move at chess. meanwhil bulstrod had determin on hi move,
and he said, with gather resolut—

“you will do well to reflect, mr. raffl, that it is possibl for 
man to overreach himself in the effort to secur undu advantag.
although i am not in ani wai bound to you, i am will to suppli 
with a regular annuiti—in quarterli payment—so long as you fulfil 
promis to remain at a distanc from thi neighborhood. it is in 
power to choos. if you insist on remain here, even for a 
time, you will get noth from me. i shall declin to know you.”

“ha, ha!” said raffl, with an affect explos, “that remind me 
a droll dog of a thief who declin to know the constabl.”

“your allus ar lost on me sir,” said bulstrod, with white heat;
“the law ha no hold on me either through your agenc or ani other.”

“you can’t understand a joke, my good fellow. i onli meant that 
should never declin to know you. but let us be seriou. your 
payment won’t quit suit me. i like my freedom.”

here raffl rose and stalk onc or twice up and down the room,
swing hi leg, and assum an air of masterli medit. at 
he stop opposit bulstrod, and said, “i’ll tell you what! give us 
coupl of hundr—come, that’s modest—and i’ll go awai—
bright!—pick up my portmanteau and go awai. but i shall not give up 
liberti for a dirti annuiti. i shall come and go where i like. 
it mai suit me to stai awai, and correspond with a friend; perhap not.
have you the monei with you?”

“no, i have on hundr,” said bulstrod, feel the 
riddanc too great a relief to be reject on the ground of 
uncertainti. “i will forward you the other if you will mention 
address.”

“no, i’ll wait here till you bring it,” said raffl. “i’ll take 
stroll and have a snack, and you’ll be back by that time.”

mr. bulstrod’s sickli bodi, shatter by the agit he had 
through sinc the last even, made him feel abjectli in the power 
thi loud invulner man. at that moment he snatch at a 
repos to be won on ani term. he wa rise to do what 
suggest, when the latter said, lift up hi finger as if with 
sudden recollect—

“i did have anoth look after sarah again, though i didn’t tell you;
i’d a tender conscienc about that pretti young woman. i didn’t 
her, but i found out her husband’s name, and i made a note of it. 
hang it, i lost my pocketbook. howev, if i heard it, i should know 
again. i’ve got my faculti as if i wa in my prime, but name 
out, by jove! sometim i’m no better than a confound tax-
befor the name ar fill in. howev, if i hear of her and 
famili, you shall know, nick. you’d like to do someth for her, 
she’s your step-daughter.”

“doubtless,” said mr. bulstrod, with the usual steadi look of 
light-grai ey; “though that might reduc my power of assist you.”

as he walk out of the room, raffl wink slowli at hi back, 
then turn toward the window to watch the banker 
awai—virtual at hi command. hi lip first curl with a smile 
then open with a short triumphant laugh.

“but what the deuc wa the name?” he present said, half aloud,
scratch hi head, and wrinkl hi brow horizont. he had 
realli care or thought about thi point of forget until 
occur to him in hi invent of annoy for bulstrod.

“it began with l; it wa almost all l’s i fanci,” he went on, with 
sens that he wa get hold of the slipperi name. but the hold 
too slight, and he soon got tire of thi mental chase; for few 
were more impati of privat occup or more in need of 
themselv continu heard than mr. raffl. he prefer us 
time in pleasant convers with the bailiff and the housekeep,
from whom he gather as much as he want to know about mr.
bulstrod’s posit in middlemarch.

after all, howev, there wa a dull space of time which 
reliev with bread and chees and al, and when he wa seat 
with these resourc in the wainscot parlor, he suddenli slap 
knee, and exclaim, “ladislaw!” that action of memori which he 
tri to set go, and had abandon in despair, had 
complet itself without consciou effort—a common experi,
agreeabl as a complet sneez, even if the name rememb is of 
valu. raffl immedi took out hi pocket-book, and wrote down 
name, not becaus he expect to us it, but mere for the sake of 
be at a loss if he ever did happen to want it. he wa not go 
tell bulstrod: there wa no actual good in tell, and to a mind 
that of mr. raffl there is alwai probabl good in a secret.

he wa satisfi with hi present success, and by three o’clock 
dai he had taken up hi portmanteau at the turnpik and mount 
coach, reliev mr. bulstrod’s ey of an ugli black spot on 
landscap at stone court, but not reliev him of the dread that 
black spot might reappear and becom insepar even from the 
of hi hearth.




book vi.
the widow and the wife.




chapter liv.

“negli occhi porta la mia donna amor;
per che si fa gentil ciò ch’ella mira:
ov’ella passa, ogni uom ver lei si gira,
e cui saluta fa tremar lo core.

sicchè, bassando il viso, tutto smore,
e d’ogni suo difetto allor sospira:
fuggon dinanzi a lei superbia ed ira:
aiutatemi, donn, a farl onor.

ogni dolcezza, ogni pensiero 
nasc nel core a chi parlar la sent;
ond’è beato chi prima la vide.
quel ch’ella par quand’ un poco sorrid,
non si può dicer, nè tener a ment,
si è nuovo miracolo gentil.”
—dant: _la vita nuova_.


by that delight morn when the hai-rick at stone court 
scent the air quit imparti, as if mr. raffl had been a 
worthi of finest incens, dorothea had again taken up her abod 
lowick manor. after three month freshitt had becom rather oppress:
to sit like a model for saint catherin look raptur at celia’
babi would not do for mani hour in the dai, and to remain in 
moment babe’s presenc with persist disregard wa a cours 
could not have been toler in a childless sister. dorothea 
have been capabl of carri babi joyfulli for a mile if there 
been need, and of love it the more tenderli for that labor; but to 
aunt who doe not recogn her infant nephew as bouddha, and 
noth to do for him but to admir, hi behavior is apt to 
monoton, and the interest of watch him exhaust. 
possibl wa quit hidden from celia, who felt that dorothea’
childless widowhood fell in quit prettili with the birth of 
arthur (babi wa name after mr. brook).

“dodo is just the creatur not to mind about have anyth of 
own—children or anyth!” said celia to her husband. “and if she 
had a babi, it never could have been such a dear as arthur. could it,
jame?

“not if it had been like casaubon,” said sir jame, consciou of 
indirect in hi answer, and of hold a strictli privat 
as to the perfect of hi first-born.

“no! just imagin! realli it wa a merci,” said celia; “and i think 
is veri nice for dodo to be a widow. she can be just as fond of 
babi as if it were her own, and she can have as mani notion of her 
as she like.”

“it is a piti she wa not a queen,” said the devout sir jame.

“but what should we have been then? we must have been someth els,”
said celia, object to so labori a flight of imagin. “i 
her better as she is.”

henc, when she found that dorothea wa make arrang for 
final departur to lowick, celia rais her eyebrow 
disappoint, and in her quiet unemphat wai shot a needl-arrow 
sarcasm.

“what will you do at lowick, dodo? you sai yourself there is noth 
be done there: everybodi is so clean and well off, it make you 
melancholi. and here you have been so happi go all about tipton 
mr. garth into the worst backyard. and now uncl is abroad, you 
mr. garth can have it all your own wai; and i am sure jame 
everyth you tell him.”

“i shall often come here, and i shall see how babi grow all 
better,” said dorothea.

“but you will never see him wash,” said celia; “and that is quit 
best part of the dai.” she wa almost pout: it did seem to her 
hard in dodo to go awai from the babi when she might stai.

“dear kitti, i will come and stai all night on purpos,” said dorothea;
“but i want to be alon now, and in my own home. i wish to know 
farebroth better, and to talk to mr. farebroth about what there 
to be done in middlemarch.”

dorothea’s nativ strength of will wa no longer all convert 
resolut submiss. she had a great yearn to be at lowick, and 
simpli determin to go, not feel bound to tell all her reason. 
everi on around her disapprov. sir jame wa much pain, 
offer that thei should all migrat to cheltenham for a few 
with the sacr ark, otherwis call a cradl: at that period a 
could hardli know what to propos if cheltenham were reject.

the dowag ladi chettam, just return from a visit to her daughter 
town, wish, at least, that mr. vigo should be written to, 
invit to accept the offic of companion to mr. casaubon: it wa 
credibl that dorothea as a young widow would think of live alon 
the hous at lowick. mr. vigo had been reader and secretari to 
personag, and in point of knowledg and sentiment even 
could have noth to object to her.

mr. cadwallad said, privat, “you will certainli go mad in 
hous alon, my dear. you will see vision. we have all got to 
ourselv a littl to keep sane, and call thing by the same name 
other peopl call them by. to be sure, for younger son and women 
have no monei, it is a sort of provis to go mad: thei ar taken 
of then. but you must not run into that. i dare sai you ar a 
bore here with our good dowag; but think what a bore you 
becom yourself to your fellow-creatur if you were alwai 
tragedi queen and take thing sublim. sit alon in 
librari at lowick you mai fanci yourself rule the weather; you 
get a few peopl round you who wouldn’t believ you if you told them.
that is a good lower medicin.”

“i never call everyth by the same name that all the peopl 
me did,” said dorothea, stoutli.

“but i suppos you have found out your mistak, my dear,” said mr.
cadwallad, “and that is a proof of saniti.”

dorothea wa awar of the sting, but it did not hurt her. “no,” 
said, “i still think that the greater part of the world is 
about mani thing. sure on mai be sane and yet think so, sinc 
greater part of the world ha often had to come round from 
opinion.”

mr. cadwallad said no more on that point to dorothea, but to 
husband she remark, “it will be well for her to marri again as 
as it is proper, if on could get her among the right peopl. of 
the chettam would not wish it. but i see clearli a husband is the 
thing to keep her in order. if we were not so poor i would invit 
triton. he will be marqui some dai, and there is no deni that 
would make a good marchio: she look handsom than ever in 
mourn.”

“my dear elinor, do let the poor woman alon. such contriv ar 
no us,” said the easi rector.

“no us? how ar match made, except by bring men and 
togeth? and it is a shame that her uncl should have run awai 
shut up the grang just now. there ought to be plenti of 
match invit to freshitt and the grang. lord triton is 
the man: full of plan for make the peopl happi in a soft-
sort of wai. that would just suit mr. casaubon.”

“let mr. casaubon choos for herself, elinor.”

“that is the nonsens you wise men talk! how can she choos if she 
no varieti to choos from? a woman’s choic usual mean take 
onli man she can get. mark my word, humphrei. if her friend don’
exert themselv, there will be a wors busi than the 
busi yet.”

“for heaven’s sake don’t touch on that topic, elinor! it is a veri 
point with sir jame. he would be deepli offend if you enter on 
to him unnecessarili.”

“i have never enter on it,” said mr cadwallad, open her hand.
“celia told me all about the will at the begin, without ani 
of mine.”

“ye, ye; but thei want the thing hush up, and i understand that 
young fellow is go out of the neighborhood.”

mr. cadwallad said noth, but gave her husband three 
nod, with a veri sarcast express in her dark ey.

dorothea quietli persist in spite of remonstr and persuas. 
by the end of june the shutter were all open at lowick manor, 
the morn gaze calmli into the librari, shine on the row 
note-book as it shine on the weari wast plant with huge stone,
the mute memori of a forgotten faith; and the even laden 
rose enter silent into the blue-green boudoir where dorothea 
oftenest to sit. at first she walk into everi room, question 
eighteen month of her marri life, and carri on her thought as 
thei were a speech to be heard by her husband. then, she linger 
the librari and could not be at rest till she had carefulli rang 
the note-book as she imagin that he would wish to see them, 
orderli sequenc. the piti which had been the restrain 
motiv in her life with him still clung about hi imag, even while 
remonstr with him in indign thought and told him that he 
unjust. on littl act of her mai perhap be smile at 
superstiti. the synopt tabul for the us of mr. casaubon,
she carefulli enclos and seal, write within the envelop, “
could not us it. do you not see now that i could not submit my soul 
your, by work hopelessli at what i have no belief in—dorothea?”
then she deposit the paper in her own desk.

that silent colloqui wa perhap onli the more earnest 
underneath and through it all there wa alwai the deep long 
had realli determin her to come to lowick. the long wa to 
will ladislaw. she did not know ani good that could come of 
meet: she wa helpless; her hand had been ti from make up 
him for ani unfair in hi lot. but her soul thirst to see him.
how could it be otherwis? if a princess in the dai of enchant 
seen a four-foot creatur from among those which live in herd 
to her onc and again with a human gaze which rest upon her 
choic and beseech, what would she think of in her journei, 
would she look for when the herd pass her? sure for the gaze 
had found her, and which she would know again. life would be no 
than candl-light tinsel and daylight rubbish if our spirit were 
touch by what ha been, to issu of long and constanc. it 
true that dorothea want to know the farebroth better, 
especi to talk to the new rector, but also true that 
what lydgat had told her about will ladislaw and littl miss nobl,
she count on will’s come to lowick to see the farebroth famili.
the veri first sundai, _befor_ she enter the church, she saw him 
she had seen him the last time she wa there, alon in the clergyman’
pew; but _when_ she enter hi figur wa gone.

in the week-dai when she went to see the ladi at the rectori, 
listen in vain for some word that thei might let fall about will; 
it seem to her that mr. farebroth talk of everi on els in 
neighborhood and out of it.

“probabl some of mr. farebroth’s middlemarch hearer mai follow 
to lowick sometim. do you not think so?” said dorothea, 
despis herself for have a secret motiv in ask the question.

“if thei ar wise thei will, mr. casaubon,” said the old ladi. “i 
that you set a right valu on my son’s preach. hi grandfath on 
side wa an excel clergyman, but hi father wa in the law:—
exemplari and honest nevertheless, which is a reason for our 
be rich. thei sai fortun is a woman and caprici. but 
she is a good woman and give to those who merit, which ha been 
case with you, mr. casaubon, who have given a live to my son.”

mr. farebroth recur to her knit with a dignifi 
in her neat littl effort at oratori, but thi wa not what 
want to hear. poor thing! she did not even know whether will 
wa still at middlemarch, and there wa no on whom she dare to ask,
unless it were lydgat. but just now she could not see lydgat 
send for him or go to seek him. perhap will ladislaw, 
heard of that strang ban against him left by mr. casaubon, had felt 
better that he and she should not meet again, and perhap she wa 
to wish for a meet that other might find mani good reason against.
still “i do wish it” came at the end of those wise reflect 
natur as a sob after hold the breath. and the meet 
happen, but in a formal wai quit unexpect by her.

on morn, about eleven, dorothea wa seat in her boudoir with 
map of the land attach to the manor and other paper befor her,
which were to help her in make an exact statement for herself of 
incom and affair. she had not yet appli herself to her work, 
wa seat with her hand fold on her lap, look out along 
avenu of lime to the distant field. everi leaf wa at rest in 
sunshin, the familiar scene wa changeless, and seem to 
the prospect of her life, full of motiveless eas—motiveless, if 
own energi could not seek out reason for ardent action. the widow’
cap of those time made an oval frame for the face, and had a 
stand up; the dress wa an experi in the utmost lai on 
crape; but thi heavi solemn of cloth made her face look all 
younger, with it recov bloom, and the sweet, inquir candor 
her ey.

her reveri wa broken by tantripp, who came to sai that mr. 
wa below, and beg permiss to see madam if it were not too earli.

“i will see him,” said dorothea, rise immedi. “let him be 
into the draw-room.”

the draw-room wa the most neutral room in the hous to her—the 
least associ with the trial of her marri life: the 
match the wood-work, which wa all white and gold; there were 
tall mirror and tabl with noth on them—in brief, it wa a 
where you had no reason for sit in on place rather than 
anoth. it wa below the boudoir, and had also a bow-window 
out on the avenu. but when pratt show will ladislaw into it 
window wa open; and a wing visitor, buzz in and out now and 
without mind the furnitur, made the room look less formal 
uninhabit.

“glad to see you here again, sir,” said pratt, linger to adjust 
blind.

“i am onli come to sai good-by, pratt,” said will, who wish even 
butler to know that he wa too proud to hang about mr. casaubon 
she wa a rich widow.

“veri sorri to hear it, sir,” said pratt, retir. of cours, as 
servant who wa to be told noth, he knew the fact of which 
wa still ignor, and had drawn hi infer; inde, had 
differ from hi betroth tantripp when she said, “your master wa 
jealou as a fiend—and no reason. madam would look higher than mr.
ladislaw, els i don’t know her. mr. cadwallad’s maid sai there’s 
lord come who is to marri her when the mourn’s over.”

there were not mani moment for will to walk about with hi hat in 
hand befor dorothea enter. the meet wa veri differ from 
first meet in rome when will had been embarrass and dorothea calm.
thi time he felt miser but determin, while she wa in a state 
agit which could not be hidden. just outsid the door she had 
that thi long-for meet wa after all too difficult, and when 
saw will advanc toward her, the deep blush which wa rare in 
came with pain sudden. neither of them knew how it wa, 
neither of them spoke. she gave her hand for a moment, and then 
went to sit down near the window, she on on sette and he on 
opposit. will wa peculiarli uneasi: it seem to him not 
dorothea that the mere fact of her be a widow should caus such 
chang in her manner of receiv him; and he knew of no 
condit which could have affect their previou relat to 
other—except that, as hi imagin at onc told him, her 
might have been poison her mind with their suspicion of him.

“i hope i have not presum too much in call,” said will; “i 
not bear to leav the neighborhood and begin a new life without 
you to sai good-by.”

“presum? sure not. i should have thought it unkind if you had 
wish to see me,” said dorothea, her habit of speak with 
genuin assert itself through all her uncertainti and agit.
“ar you go awai immedi?”

“veri soon, i think. i intend to go to town and eat my dinner as 
barrist, sinc, thei sai, that is the prepar for all 
busi. there will be a great deal of polit work to be 
by-and-by, and i mean to try and do some of it. other men have 
to win an honor posit for themselv without famili or monei.”

“and that will make it all the more honor,” said dorothea,
ardent. “besid, you have so mani talent. i have heard from 
uncl how well you speak in public, so that everi on is sorri when 
leav off, and how clearli you can explain thing. and you care 
justic should be done to everi on. i am so glad. when we were 
rome, i thought you onli care for poetri and art, and the thing 
adorn life for us who ar well off. but now i know you think about 
rest of the world.”

while she wa speak dorothea had lost her person embarrass,
and had becom like her former self. she look at will with a 
glanc, full of delight confid.

“you approv of my go awai for year, then, and never come 
again till i have made myself of some mark in the world?” said will,
try hard to reconcil the utmost pride with the utmost effort to 
an express of strong feel from dorothea.

she wa not awar how long it wa befor she answer. she had 
her head and wa look out of the window on the rose-bush, 
seem to have in them the summer of all the year when will would 
awai. thi wa not judici behavior. but dorothea never thought 
studi her manner: she thought onli of bow to a sad 
which divid her from will. those first word of hi about 
intent had seem to make everyth clear to her: he knew, 
suppos, all about mr. casaubon’s final conduct in relat to him,
and it had come to him with the same sort of shock as to herself. 
had never felt more than friendship for her—had never had anyth 
hi mind to justifi what she felt to be her husband’s outrag on 
feel of both: and that friendship he still felt. someth 
mai be call an inward silent sob had gone on in dorothea befor 
said with a pure voic, just trembl in the last word as if 
from it liquid flexibl—

“ye, it must be right for you to do as you sai. i shall be veri 
when i hear that you have made your valu felt. but you must 
patienc. it will perhap be a long while.”

will never quit knew how it wa that he save himself from 
down at her feet, when the “long while” came forth with it 
tremor. he us to sai that the horribl hue and surfac of her 
dress wa most like the suffici control forc. he sat still,
howev, and onli said—

“i shall never hear from you. and you will forget all about me.”

“no,” said dorothea, “i shall never forget you. i have never 
ani on whom i onc knew. my life ha never been crowd, and seem 
like to be so. and i have a great deal of space for memori at lowick,
haven’t i?” she smile.

“good god!” will burst out passion, rise, with hi hat still 
hi hand, and walk awai to a marbl tabl, where he suddenli 
and lean hi back against it. the blood had mount to hi face 
neck, and he look almost angri. it had seem to him as if thei 
like two creatur slowli turn to marbl in each other’s presenc,
while their heart were consciou and their ey were yearn. 
there wa no help for it. it should never be true of him that in 
meet to which he had come with bitter resolut he had end by 
confess which might be interpret into ask for her fortun.
moreov, it wa actual true that he wa fear of the effect 
such confess might have on dorothea herself.

she look at him from that distanc in some troubl, imagin 
there might have been an offenc in her word. but all the while 
wa a current of thought in her about hi probabl want of monei, 
the imposs of her help him. if her uncl had been at home,
someth might have been done through him! it wa thi 
with the hardship of will’s want monei, while she had what ought 
have been hi share, which led her to sai, see that he 
silent and look awai from her—

“i wonder whether you would like to have that miniatur which 
up-stair—i mean that beauti miniatur of your grandmoth. i 
it is not right for me to keep it, if you would wish to have it. it 
wonderfulli like you.”

“you ar veri good,” said will, irrit. “no; i don’t mind about it.
it is not veri consol to have on’s own like. it would be 
consol if other want to have it.”

“i thought you would like to cherish her memori—i thought—” 
broke off an instant, her imagin suddenli warn her awai 
aunt julia’s histori—“you would sure like to have the miniatur as 
famili memori.”

“why should i have that, when i have noth els! a man with onli 
portmanteau for hi stowag must keep hi memori in hi head.”

will spoke at random: he wa mere vent hi petul; it wa 
littl too exasper to have hi grandmoth’s portrait offer 
at that moment. but to dorothea’s feel hi word had a 
sting. she rose and said with a touch of indign as well 
hauteur—

“you ar much the happier of us two, mr. ladislaw, to have noth.”

will wa startl. whatev the word might be, the tone seem like 
dismiss; and quit hi lean postur, he walk a littl 
toward her. their ey met, but with a strang question graviti.
someth wa keep their mind aloof, and each wa left 
conjectur what wa in the other. will had realli never thought 
himself as have a claim of inherit on the properti which wa 
by dorothea, and would have requir a narr to make him 
her present feel.

“i never felt it a misfortun to have noth till now,” he said. “
poverti mai be as bad as leprosi, if it divid us from what we 
care for.”

the word cut dorothea to the heart, and made her relent. she 
in a tone of sad fellowship.

“sorrow come in so mani wai. two year ago i had no notion of that—
mean of the unexpect wai in which troubl come, and ti our hand,
and make us silent when we long to speak. i us to despis women 
littl for not shape their live more, and do better thing. i 
veri fond of do as i like, but i have almost given it up,” 
end, smile playfulli.

“i have not given up do as i like, but i can veri seldom do it,”
said will. he wa stand two yard from her with hi mind full 
contradictori desir and resolv—desir some unmistak 
that she love him, and yet dread the posit into which such 
proof might bring him. “the thing on most long for mai be 
with condit that would be intoler.”

at thi moment pratt enter and said, “sir jame chettam is in 
librari, madam.”

“ask sir jame to come in here,” said dorothea, immedi. it wa 
if the same electr shock had pass through her and will. each 
them felt proudli resist, and neither look at the other, 
thei await sir jame’s entranc.

after shake hand with dorothea, he bow as slightli as possibl 
ladislaw, who repaid the slight exactli, and then go 
dorothea, said—

“i must sai good-by, mr. casaubon; and probabl for a long while.”

dorothea put out her hand and said her good-by cordial. the 
that sir jame wa depreci will, and behav rude to him,
rous her resolut and digniti: there wa no touch of confus 
her manner. and when will had left the room, she look with such 
self-possess at sir jame, sai, “how is celia?” that he 
oblig to behav as if noth had annoi him. and what would be 
us of behav otherwis? inde, sir jame shrank with so 
dislik from the associ even in thought of dorothea with 
as her possibl lover, that he would himself have wish to avoid 
outward show of displeasur which would have recogn 
disagre possibl. if ani on had ask him why he shrank 
that wai, i am not sure that he would at first have said 
fuller or more precis than “_that_ ladislaw!”—though on reflect 
might have urg that mr. casaubon’s codicil, bar dorothea’
marriag with will, except under a penalti, wa enough to 
unfit over ani relat at all between them. hi avers wa 
the stronger becaus he felt himself unabl to interfer.

but sir jame wa a power in a wai unguess by himself. enter 
that moment, he wa an incorpor of the strongest reason 
which will’s pride becam a repel forc, keep him asund 
dorothea.




chapter lv.

hath she her fault? i would you had them too.
thei ar the fruiti must of soundest wine;
or sai, thei ar regener 
such as hath turn the dens black 
into a crystal pathwai for the sun.


if youth is the season of hope, it is often so onli in the sens 
our elder ar hope about us; for no ag is so apt as youth to 
it emot, part, and resolv ar the last of their kind. 
crisi seem final, simpli becaus it is new. we ar told that 
oldest inhabit in peru do not ceas to be agit by 
earthquak, but thei probabl see beyond each shock, and reflect 
there ar plenti more to come.

to dorothea, still in that time of youth when the ey with their 
full lash look out after their rain of tear unsoil and 
as a freshli open passion-flower, that morn’s part with 
ladislaw seem to be the close of their person relat. he 
go awai into the distanc of unknown year, and if ever he came 
he would be anoth man. the actual state of hi mind—hi proud 
to give the lie beforehand to ani suspicion that he would plai 
needi adventur seek a rich woman—lai quit out of her imagin,
and she had interpret all hi behavior easili enough by 
supposit that mr. casaubon’s codicil seem to him, as it did 
her, a gross and cruel interdict on ani activ friendship between them.
their young delight in speak to each other, and sai what no 
els would care to hear, wa forev end, and becom a treasur 
the past. for thi veri reason she dwelt on it without inward check.
that uniqu happi too wa dead, and in it shadow silent 
she might vent the passion grief which she herself wonder at. 
the first time she took down the miniatur from the wall and kept 
befor her, like to blend the woman who had been too hardli 
with the grandson whom her own heart and judgment defend. can ani 
who ha rejoic in woman’s tender think it a reproach to her 
she took the littl oval pictur in her palm and made a bed for 
there, and lean her cheek upon it, as if that would sooth 
creatur who had suffer unjust condemn? she did not know 
that it wa love who had come to her briefli, as in a dream 
awak, with the hue of morn on hi wing—that it wa love to 
she wa sob her farewel as hi imag wa banish by the 
rigor of irresist dai. she onli felt that there wa 
irrevoc amiss and lost in her lot, and her thought about 
futur were the more readili shapen into resolv. ardent soul, 
to construct their come live, ar apt to commit themselv to 
fulfil of their own vision.

on dai that she went to freshitt to fulfil her promis of stai 
night and see babi wash, mr. cadwallad came to dine, the 
be gone on a fish excurs. it wa a warm even, and even 
the delight draw-room, where the fine old turf slope from 
open window toward a lili pool and well-plant mound, the heat 
enough to make celia in her white muslin and light curl reflect 
piti on what dodo must feel in her black dress and close cap. but 
wa not until some episod with babi were over, and had left her 
at leisur. she had seat herself and taken up a fan for some 
befor she said, in her quiet guttur—

“dear dodo, do throw off that cap. i am sure your dress must make 
feel ill.”

“i am so us to the cap—it ha becom a sort of shell,” said dorothea,
smile. “i feel rather bare and expos when it is off.”

“i must see you without it; it make us all warm,” said celia, 
down her fan, and go to dorothea. it wa a pretti pictur to 
thi littl ladi in white muslin unfasten the widow’s cap from 
more majest sister, and toss it on to a chair. just as the 
and braid of dark-brown hair had been set free, sir jame enter 
room. he look at the releas head, and said, “ah!” in a tone 
satisfact.

“it wa i who did it, jame,” said celia. “dodo need not make such 
slaveri of her mourn; she need not wear that cap ani more among 
friend.”

“my dear celia,” said ladi chettam, “a widow must wear her mourn 
least a year.”

“not if she marri again befor the end of it,” said mr. cadwallad,
who had some pleasur in startl her good friend the dowag. 
jame wa annoi, and lean forward to plai with celia’s maltes dog.

“that is veri rare, i hope,” said ladi chettam, in a tone intend 
guard against such event. “no friend of our ever commit herself 
that wai except mr. beevor, and it wa veri pain to lord 
when she did so. her first husband wa objection, which made it 
greater wonder. and sever she wa punish for it. thei said 
beevor drag her about by the hair, and held up load pistol 
her.”

“oh, if she took the wrong man!” said mr. cadwallad, who wa in 
decidedli wick mood. “marriag is alwai bad then, first or second.
prioriti is a poor recommend in a husband if he ha got no other.
i would rather have a good second husband than an indiffer first.”

“my dear, your clever tongu run awai with you,” said ladi chettam. “
am sure you would be the last woman to marri again prematur, if 
dear rector were taken awai.”

“oh, i make no vow; it might be a necessari economi. it is law 
marri again, i suppos; els we might as well be hindoo instead 
christian. of cours if a woman accept the wrong man, she must 
the consequ, and on who doe it twice over deserv her fate. 
if she can marri blood, beauti, and braveri—the sooner the better.”

“i think the subject of our convers is veri ill-chosen,” said 
jame, with a look of disgust. “suppos we chang it.”

“not on my account, sir jame,” said dorothea, determin not to 
the opportun of free herself from certain obliqu refer 
excel match. “if you ar speak on my behalf, i can assur 
that no question can be more indiffer and imperson to me 
second marriag. it is no more to me than if you talk of women 
fox-hunt: whether it is admir in them or not, i shall not 
them. prai let mr. cadwallad amus herself on that subject as 
as on ani other.”

“my dear mr. casaubon,” said ladi chettam, in her stateliest wai, “
do not, i hope, think there wa ani allus to you in my 
mr. beevor. it wa onli an instanc that occur to me. she 
step-daughter to lord grinsel: he marri mr. teveroi for hi 
wife. there could be no possibl allus to you.”

“oh no,” said celia. “nobodi chose the subject; it all came out 
dodo’s cap. mr. cadwallad onli said what wa quit true. a 
could not be marri in a widow’s cap, jame.”

“hush, my dear!” said mr. cadwallad. “i will not offend again. 
will not even refer to dido or zenobia. onli what ar we to talk about?
i, for my part, object to the discuss of human natur, becaus 
is the natur of rector’ wive.”

later in the even, after mr. cadwallad wa gone, celia 
privat to dorothea, “realli, dodo, take your cap off made you 
yourself again in more wai than on. you spoke up just as you us 
do, when anyth wa said to displeas you. but i could hardli 
out whether it wa jame that you thought wrong, or mr. cadwallad.”

“neither,” said dorothea. “jame spoke out of delicaci to me, but 
wa mistaken in suppos that i mind what mr. cadwallad said. 
should onli mind if there were a law oblig me to take ani piec 
blood and beauti that she or anybodi els recommend.”

“but you know, dodo, if you ever did marri, it would be all the 
to have blood and beauti,” said celia, reflect that mr. casaubon 
not been richli endow with those gift, and that it would be well 
caution dorothea in time.

“don’t be anxiou, kitti; i have quit other thought about my life. 
shall never marri again,” said dorothea, touch her sister’s chin,
and look at her with indulg affect. celia wa nurs 
babi, and dorothea had come to sai good-night to her.

“realli—quit?” said celia. “not anybodi at all—if he were 
wonder inde?”

dorothea shook her head slowli. “not anybodi at all. i have 
plan. i should like to take a great deal of land, and drain it, 
make a littl coloni, where everybodi should work, and all the 
should be done well. i should know everi on of the peopl and be 
friend. i am go to have great consult with mr. garth: he 
tell me almost everyth i want to know.”

“then you _will_ be happi, if you have a plan, dodo?” said celia.
“perhap littl arthur will like plan when he grow up, and then 
can help you.”

sir jame wa inform that same night that dorothea wa realli 
set against marri anybodi at all, and wa go to take to “
sort of plan,” just like what she us to have. sir jame made 
remark. to hi secret feel there wa someth repuls in 
woman’s second marriag, and no match would prevent him from feel 
a sort of desecr for dorothea. he wa awar that the world 
regard such a sentiment as preposter, especi in relat to 
woman of on-and-twenti; the practic of “the world” be to treat 
a young widow’s second marriag as certain and probabl near, and 
smile with mean if the widow act accordingli. but if dorothea 
choos to espous her solitud, he felt that the resolut would 
becom her.




chapter lvi.

“how happi is he born and 
that serveth not anoth’s will;
whose armor is hi honest thought,
and simpl truth hi onli skill!
. . . . . . .
thi man is freed from servil 
of hope to rise or fear to fall;
lord of himself though not of land;
and have noth yet hath all.”
—sir henri wotton.


dorothea’s confid in caleb garth’s knowledg, which had begun 
her hear that he approv of her cottag, had grown fast dure 
stai at freshitt, sir jame have induc her to take ride over 
two estat in compani with himself and caleb, who quit return 
admir, and told hi wife that mr. casaubon had a head 
busi most uncommon in a woman. it must be rememb that 
“busi” caleb never meant monei transact, but the 
applic of labor.

“most uncommon!” repeat caleb. “she said a thing i often us 
think myself when i wa a lad:—‘mr. garth, i should like to feel, if 
live to be old, that i had improv a great piec of land and built 
great mani good cottag, becaus the work is of a healthi kind 
it is be done, and after it is done, men ar the better for it.’
those were the veri word: she see into thing in that wai.”

“but womanli, i hope,” said mr. garth, half suspect that mr.
casaubon might not hold the true principl of subordin.

“oh, you can’t think!” said caleb, shake hi head. “you would like 
hear her speak, susan. she speak in such plain word, and a voic 
music. bless me! it remind me of bit in the ‘messiah’—‘
straightwai there appear a multitud of the heavenli host, 
god and sai;’ it ha a tone with it that satisfi your ear.”

caleb wa veri fond of music, and when he could afford it went to 
an oratorio that came within hi reach, return from it with 
profound rever for thi mighti structur of tone, which made 
sit medit, look on the floor and throw much 
languag into hi outstretch hand.

with thi good understand between them, it wa natur that 
ask mr. garth to undertak ani busi connect with the 
farm and the numer tenement attach to lowick manor; inde, 
expect of get work for two wa be fast fulfil. as 
said, “busi breed.” and on form of busi which wa 
to breed just then wa the construct of railwai. a project 
wa to run through lowick parish where the cattl had hitherto 
in a peac unbroken by astonish; and thu it happen that 
infant struggl of the railwai system enter into the affair 
caleb garth, and determin the cours of thi histori with regard 
two person who were dear to him. the submarin railwai mai have 
difficulti; but the bed of the sea is not divid among 
land proprietor with claim for damag not onli measur 
sentiment. in the hundr to which middlemarch belong railwai 
as excit a topic as the reform bill or the immin horror 
cholera, and those who held the most decid view on the subject 
women and landhold. women both old and young regard travel 
steam as presumptu and danger, and argu against it by 
that noth should induc them to get into a railwai carriag; 
proprietor, differ from each other in their argument as much 
mr. solomon featherston differ from lord medlicot, were 
unanim in the opinion that in sell land, whether to the enemi 
mankind or to a compani oblig to purchas, these pernici 
must be made to pai a veri high price to landown for permiss 
injur mankind.

but the slower wit, such as mr. solomon and mr. waul, who 
occupi land of their own, took a long time to arriv at 
conclus, their mind halt at the vivid concept of what 
would be to cut the big pastur in two, and turn it into three-
bit, which would be “nohow;” while accommod-bridg and 
payment were remot and incred.

“the cow will all cast their calv, brother,” said mr. waul, in 
tone of deep melancholi, “if the railwai come across the near close;
and i shouldn’t wonder at the mare too, if she wa in foal. it’s a 
tale if a widow’s properti is to be spade awai, and the law 
noth to it. what’s to hinder ’em from cut right and left if 
begin? it’s well known, _i_ can’t fight.”

“the best wai would be to sai noth, and set somebodi on to send ’
awai with a flea in their ear, when thei came spy and measur,”
said solomon. “folk did that about brass, by what i can understand.
it’s all a pretenc, if the truth wa known, about their be 
to take on wai. let ’em go cut in anoth parish. and i don’
believ in ani pai to make amend for bring a lot of ruffian 
trampl your crop. where’s a compani’s pocket?”

“brother peter, god forgiv him, got monei out of a compani,” said mr.
waul. “but that wa for the manganes. that wasn’t for railwai 
blow you to piec right and left.”

“well, there’s thi to be said, jane,” mr. solomon conclud, 
hi voic in a cautiou manner—“the more spoke we put in their wheel,
the more thei’ll pai us to let ’em go on, if thei must come whether 
not.”

thi reason of mr. solomon’s wa perhap less thorough than 
imagin, hi cun bear about the same relat to the cours 
railwai as the cun of a diplomatist bear to the gener chill 
catarrh of the solar system. but he set about act on hi view in 
thoroughli diplomat manner, by stimul suspicion. hi side 
lowick wa the most remot from the villag, and the hous of 
labor peopl were either lone cottag or were collect in a 
call frick, where a water-mill and some stone-pit made a 
centr of slow, heavi-shoulder industri.

in the absenc of ani precis idea as to what railwai were, 
opinion in frick wa against them; for the human mind in that 
corner had not the proverbi tendenc to admir the unknown, 
rather that it wa like to be against the poor man, and 
suspicion wa the onli wise attitud with regard to it. even the 
of reform had not yet excit ani millenni expect in frick,
there be no definit promis in it, as of gratuit grain 
fatten hiram ford’s pig, or of a publican at the “weight and scale”
who would brew beer for noth, or of an offer on the part of 
three neighbor farmer to rais wage dure winter. and 
distinct good of thi kind in it promis, reform seem on a 
with the brag of pedler, which wa a hint for distrust to 
know person. the men of frick were not ill-fed, and were less 
to fanatic than to a strong muscular suspicion; less inclin 
believ that thei were peculiarli care for by heaven, than to 
heaven itself as rather dispos to take them in—a 
observ in the weather.

thu the mind of frick wa exactli of the sort for mr. 
featherston to work upon, he have more plenteou idea of the 
order, with a suspicion of heaven and earth which wa better fed 
more entir at leisur. solomon wa overs of the road at 
time, and on hi slow-pace cob often took hi round by frick to 
at the workmen get the stone there, paus with a 
deliber, which might have misl you into suppos that he 
some other reason for stai than the mere want of impuls to move.
after look for a long while at ani work that wa go on, he 
rais hi ey a littl and look at the horizon; final he would 
hi bridl, touch hi hors with the whip, and get it to move 
onward. the hour-hand of a clock wa quick by comparison with mr.
solomon, who had an agreeabl sens that he could afford to be slow. 
wa in the habit of paus for a cautiou, vagu design chat 
everi hedger or ditcher on hi wai, and wa especi will 
listen even to new which he had heard befor, feel himself at 
advantag over all narrat in partial disbeliev them. on dai,
howev, he got into a dialogu with hiram ford, a wagon, in which 
himself contribut inform. he wish to know whether hiram 
seen fellow with stave and instrument spy about: thei 
themselv railroad peopl, but there wa no tell what thei were 
what thei meant to do. the least thei pretend wa that thei 
go to cut lowick parish into six and seven.

“why, there’ll be no stirrin’ from on pla-ac to anoth,” said hiram,
think of hi wagon and hors.

“not a bit,” said mr. solomon. “and cut up fine land such as 
parish! let ’em go into tipton, sai i. but there’s no know 
there is at the bottom of it. traffic is what thei put for’ard; 
it’s to do harm to the land and the poor man in the long-run.”

“why, thei’re lunnon chap, i reckon,” said hiram, who had a dim 
of london as a centr of hostil to the countri.

“ay, to be sure. and in some part against brass, by what i’ve 
sai, the folk fell on ’em when thei were spy, and broke 
peep-hole as thei carri, and drove ’em awai, so as thei knew 
than come again.”

“it war good foon, i’d be bound,” said hiram, whose fun wa 
restrict by circumst.

“well, i wouldn’t meddl with ’em myself,” said solomon. “but some 
thi countri’s seen it best dai, and the sign is, as it’s 
overrun with these fellow trampl right and left, and want to 
it up into railwai; and all for the big traffic to swallow up 
littl, so as there shan’t be a team left on the land, nor a whip 
crack.”

“i’ll crack _my_ whip about their ear’n, afor thei bring it to that,
though,” said hiram, while mr. solomon, shake hi bridl, 
onward.

nettl-seed need no dig. the ruin of thi countrysid by 
wa discuss, not onli at the “weight and scale,” but in 
hai-field, where the muster of work hand gave opportun 
talk such as were rare had through the rural year.

on morn, not long after that interview between mr. farebroth 
mari garth, in which she confess to him her feel for fred vinci,
it happen that her father had some busi which took him 
yoddrel’s farm in the direct of frick: it wa to measur and 
an outli piec of land belong to lowick manor, which 
expect to dispos of advantag for dorothea (it must 
confess that hi bia wa toward get the best possibl 
from railroad compani). he put up hi gig at yoddrel’s, and 
walk with hi assist and measur-chain to the scene of 
work, he encount the parti of the compani’s agent, who 
adjust their spirit-level. after a littl chat he left them,
observ that by-and-by thei would reach him again where he wa 
to measur. it wa on of those grai morn after light rain, 
becom delici about twelv o’clock, when the cloud part a littl,
and the scent of the earth is sweet along the lane and by 
hedgerow.

the scent would have been sweeter to fred vinci, who wa come 
the lane on horseback, if hi mind had not been worri 
unsuccess effort to imagin what he wa to do, with hi father 
on side expect him straightwai to enter the church, with mari 
the other threaten to forsak him if he did enter it, and with 
work-dai world show no eager need whatev of a young 
without capit and gener unskil. it wa the harder to fred’
disposit becaus hi father, satisfi that he wa no 
rebelli, wa in good humor with him, and had sent him on 
pleasant ride to see after some greyhound. even when he had fix 
what he should do, there would be the task of tell hi father. 
it must be admit that the fix, which had to come first, wa 
more difficult task:—what secular avoc on earth wa there for 
young man (whose friend could not get him an “appoint”) which 
at onc gentlemanli, lucr, and to be follow without 
knowledg? ride along the lane by frick in thi mood, and 
hi pace while he reflect whether he should ventur to go round 
lowick parsonag to call on mari, he could see over the hedg from 
field to anoth. suddenli a nois rous hi attent, and on the 
side of a field on hi left hand he could see six or seven men 
smock-frock with hai-fork in their hand make an offens 
toward the four railwai agent who were face them, while caleb 
and hi assist were hasten across the field to join 
threaten group. fred, delai a few moment by have to find 
gate, could not gallop up to the spot befor the parti in smock-frock,
whose work of turn the hai had not been too press 
swallow their mid-dai beer, were drive the men in coat 
them with their hai-fork; while caleb garth’s assist, a lad 
seventeen, who had snatch up the spirit-level at caleb’s order, 
been knock down and seem to be ly helpless. the coat men 
the advantag as runner, and fred cover their retreat by get 
front of the smock-frock and charg them suddenli enough to 
their chase into confus. “what do you confound fool mean?”
shout fred, pursu the divid group in a zigzag, and cut 
and left with hi whip. “i’ll swear to everi on of you befor 
magistr. you’ve knock the lad down and kill him, for what 
know. you’ll everi on of you be hang at the next assiz, if 
don’t mind,” said fred, who afterward laugh heartili as 
rememb hi own phrase.

the labor had been driven through the gate-wai into their hai-field,
and fred had check hi hors, when hiram ford, observ himself at 
safe challeng distanc, turn back and shout a defianc which 
did not know to be homer.

“yo’re a coward, yo ar. yo git off your hors, young measter, and i’
have a round wi’ ye, i wull. yo daredn’t come on wi’out your hoss an’
whip. i’d soon knock the breath out on ye, i would.”

“wait a minut, and i’ll come back present, and have a round with 
all in turn, if you like,” said fred, who felt confid in hi 
of box with hi dearli belov brethren. but just now he want 
hasten back to caleb and the prostrat youth.

the lad’s ankl wa strain, and he wa in much pain from it, but 
wa no further hurt, and fred place him on the hors that he 
ride to yoddrel’s and be taken care of there.

“let them put the hors in the stabl, and tell the surveyor thei 
come back for their trap,” said fred. “the ground is clear now.”

“no, no,” said caleb, “here’s a breakag. thei’ll have to give up 
to-dai, and it will be as well. here, take the thing befor you on 
hors, tom. thei’ll see you come, and thei’ll turn back.”

“i’m glad i happen to be here at the right moment, mr. garth,” 
fred, as tom rode awai. “no know what might have happen if 
cavalri had not come up in time.”

“ay, ay, it wa lucki,” said caleb, speak rather absent, 
look toward the spot where he had been at work at the moment 
interrupt. “but—deuc take it—thi is what come of men 
fool—i’m hinder of my dai’s work. i can’t get along without 
to help me with the measur-chain. howev!” he wa begin to 
toward the spot with a look of vexat, as if he had forgotten fred’
presenc, but suddenli he turn round and said quickli, “what have 
got to do to-dai, young fellow?”

“noth, mr. garth. i’ll help you with pleasur—can i?” said fred,
with a sens that he should be court mari when he wa help 
father.

“well, you mustn’t mind stoop and get hot.”

“i don’t mind anyth. onli i want to go first and have a round 
that hulki fellow who turn to challeng me. it would be a good 
for him. i shall not be five minut.”

“nonsens!” said caleb, with hi most peremptori inton. “i 
go and speak to the men myself. it’s all ignor. somebodi ha 
tell them li. the poor fool don’t know ani better.”

“i shall go with you, then,” said fred.

“no, no; stai where you ar. i don’t want your young blood. i can 
care of myself.”

caleb wa a power man and knew littl of ani fear except the fear 
hurt other and the fear of have to speechifi. but he felt it 
duti at thi moment to try and give a littl harangu. there wa 
strike mixtur in him—which came from hi have alwai been 
hard-work man himself—of rigor notion about workmen 
practic indulg toward them. to do a good dai’s work and to do 
well, he held to be part of their welfar, as it wa the chief part 
hi own happi; but he had a strong sens of fellowship with them.
when he advanc toward the labor thei had not gone to work again,
but were stand in that form of rural group which consist in 
turn a shoulder toward the other, at a distanc of two or 
yard. thei look rather sulkili at caleb, who walk quickli with 
hand in hi pocket and the other thrust between the button of 
waistcoat, and had hi everi-dai mild air when he paus among them.

“why, my lad, how’s thi?” he began, take as usual to brief phrase,
which seem pregnant to himself, becaus he had mani thought 
under them, like the abund root of a plant that just manag 
peep abov the water. “how came you to make such a mistak as thi?
somebodi ha been tell you li. you thought those men up 
want to do mischief.”

“aw!” wa the answer, drop at interv by each accord to 
degre of unreadi.

“nonsens! no such thing! thei’re look out to see which wai 
railroad is to take. now, my lad, you can’t hinder the railroad: 
will be made whether you like it or not. and if you go fight 
it, you’ll get yourselv into troubl. the law give those men 
to come here on the land. the owner ha noth to sai against it, 
if you meddl with them you’ll have to do with the constabl 
justic blakeslei, and with the handcuff and middlemarch jail. and 
might be in for it now, if anybodi inform against you.”

caleb paus here, and perhap the greatest orat could not 
chosen either hi paus or hi imag better for the occas.

“but come, you didn’t mean ani harm. somebodi told you the railroad 
a bad thing. that wa a lie. it mai do a bit of harm here and there, 
thi and to that; and so doe the sun in heaven. but the railwai’s 
good thing.”

“aw! good for the big folk to make monei out on,” said old 
cooper, who had stai behind turn hi hai while the other had 
gone on their spree;—“i’n seen lot o’ thing turn up sin’ i war 
young un—the war an’ the peac, and the canel, an’ the oald 
georg, an’ the regen’, an’ the new king georg, an’ the new un as 
got a new ne-am—an’ it’s been all aloik to the poor mon. what’s 
canel been t’ him? thei’n brought him neyther me-at nor be-acon, 
wage to lai by, if he didn’t save it wi’ clemmin’ hi own insid. 
ha’ got wusser for him sin’ i war a young un. an’ so it’ll be wi’ 
railroad. thei’ll on’y leav the poor mon furder behind. but them 
fool as meddl, and so i told the chap here. thi is the big folk’
world, thi is. but yo’re for the big folk, muster garth, yo ar.”

timothi wa a wiri old labor, of a type linger in those time—
had hi save in a stock-foot, live in a lone cottag, and 
not to be wrought on by ani oratori, have as littl of the 
spirit, and believ as littl, as if he had not been 
unacquaint with the ag of reason and the right of man. caleb wa 
a difficulti known to ani person attempt in dark time 
unassist by miracl to reason with rustic who ar in possess 
an undeni truth which thei know through a hard process of feel,
and can let it fall like a giant’s club on your neatli carv 
for a social benefit which thei do not feel. caleb had no cant 
command, even if he could have chosen to us it; and he had 
accustom to meet all such difficulti in no other wai than by 
hi “busi” faithfulli. he answer—

“if you don’t think well of me, tim, never mind; that’s neither 
nor there now. thing mai be bad for the poor man—bad thei ar; but 
want the lad here not to do what will make thing wors 
themselv. the cattl mai have a heavi load, but it won’t help ’em 
throw it over into the roadsid pit, when it’s partli their 
fodder.”

“we war on’y for a bit o’ foon,” said hiram, who wa begin to 
consequ. “that war all we war arter.”

“well, promis me not to meddl again, and i’ll see that nobodi 
against you.”

“i’n ne’er meddl, an’ i’n no call to promis,” said timothi.

“no, but the rest. come, i’m as hard at work as ani of you to-dai, 
i can’t spare much time. sai you’ll be quiet without the constabl.”

“aw, we wooant meddl—thei mai do as thei loik for oo”—were the 
in which caleb got hi pledg; and then he hasten back to fred, 
had follow him, and watch him in the gatewai.

thei went to work, and fred help vigor. hi spirit had risen,
and he heartili enjoi a good slip in the moist earth under 
hedgerow, which soil hi perfect summer trouser. wa it 
success onset which had elat him, or the satisfact of 
mari’s father? someth more. the accid of the morn had 
hi frustrat imagin to shape an employ for himself which 
sever attract. i am not sure that certain fibr in mr. garth’
mind had not resum their old vibrat toward the veri end which 
reveal itself to fred. for the effect accid is but the touch 
fire where there is oil and tow; and it alwai appear to fred 
the railwai brought the need touch. but thei went on in 
except when their busi demand speech. at last, when thei 
finish and were walk awai, mr. garth said—

“a young fellow needn’t be a b. a. to do thi sort of work, eh, fred?”

“i wish i had taken to it befor i had thought of be a b. a.,” 
fred. he paus a moment, and then ad, more hesitatingli, “do 
think i am too old to learn your busi, mr. garth?”

“my busi is of mani sort, my boi,” said mr. garth, smile. “
good deal of what i know can onli come from experi: you can’t 
it off as you learn thing out of a book. but you ar young enough 
lai a foundat yet.” caleb pronounc the last sentenc emphat,
but paus in some uncertainti. he had been under the impress 
that fred had made up hi mind to enter the church.

“you do think i could do some good at it, if i were to try?” said fred,
more eagerli.

“that depend,” said caleb, turn hi head on on side and 
hi voic, with the air of a man who felt himself to be 
someth deepli religi. “you must be sure of two thing: you 
love your work, and not be alwai look over the edg of it, 
your plai to begin. and the other is, you must not be asham of 
work, and think it would be more honor to you to be do 
els. you must have a pride in your own work and in learn to do 
well, and not be alwai sai, there’s thi and there’s that—if i 
thi or that to do, i might make someth of it. no matter what a 
is—i wouldn’t give twopenc for him”—here caleb’s mouth look bitter,
and he snap hi finger—“whether he wa the prime minist or 
rick-thatcher, if he didn’t do well what he undertook to do.”

“i can never feel that i should do that in be a clergyman,” 
fred, mean to take a step in argument.

“then let it alon, my boi,” said caleb, abruptli, “els you’ll 
be easi. or, if you _ar_ easi, you’ll be a poor stick.”

“that is veri nearli what mari think about it,” said fred, color.
“i think you must know what i feel for mari, mr. garth: i hope it 
not displeas you that i have alwai love her better than ani 
els, and that i shall never love ani on as i love her.”

the express of caleb’s face wa visibl soften while fred spoke.
but he swung hi head with a solemn slow, and said—

“that make thing more seriou, fred, if you want to take mari’
happi into your keep.”

“i know that, mr. garth,” said fred, eagerli, “and i would do 
for _her_. she sai she will never have me if i go into the church; 
i shall be the most miser devil in the world if i lose all hope 
mari. realli, if i could get some other profess, busi—
that i am at all fit for, i would work hard, i would deserv your 
opinion. i should like to have to do with outdoor thing. i know a 
deal about land and cattl alreadi. i us to believ, you know—
you will think me rather foolish for it—that i should have land of 
own. i am sure knowledg of that sort would come easili to me,
especi if i could be under you in ani wai.”

“softli, my boi,” said caleb, have the imag of “susan” befor 
ey. “what have you said to your father about all thi?”

“noth, yet; but i must tell him. i am onli wait to know what 
can do instead of enter the church. i am veri sorri to 
him, but a man ought to be allow to judg for himself when he 
four-and-twenti. how could i know when i wa fifteen, what it would 
right for me to do now? my educ wa a mistak.”

“but hearken to thi, fred,” said caleb. “ar you sure mari is fond 
you, or would ever have you?”

“i ask mr. farebroth to talk to her, becaus she had forbidden me—
didn’t know what els to do,” said fred, apologet. “and he 
that i have everi reason to hope, if i can put myself in an 
posit—i mean, out of the church. i dare sai you think 
unwarrant in me, mr. garth, to be troubl you and obtrud 
own wish about mari, befor i have done anyth at all for myself.
of cours i have not the least claim—inde, i have alreadi a debt 
you which will never be discharg, even when i have been abl to 
it in the shape of monei.”

“ye, my boi, you have a claim,” said caleb, with much feel in 
voic. “the young on have alwai a claim on the old to help 
forward. i wa young myself onc and had to do without much help; 
help would have been welcom to me, if it had been onli for 
fellow-feel’s sake. but i must consid. come to me to-morrow at 
offic, at nine o’clock. at the offic, mind.”

mr. garth would take no import step without consult susan, but 
must be confess that befor he reach home he had taken 
resolut. with regard to a larg number of matter about which 
men ar decid or obstin, he wa the most easili manag man 
the world. he never knew what meat he would choos, and if susan 
said that thei ought to live in a four-room cottag, in order 
save, he would have said, “let us go,” without inquir into detail.
but where caleb’s feel and judgment strongli pronounc, he wa 
ruler; and in spite of hi mild and timid in reprov, 
on about him knew that on the except occas when he chose, 
wa absolut. he never, inde, chose to be absolut except on some 
els’s behalf. on nineti-nine point mr. garth decid, but on 
hundredth she wa often awar that she would have to perform 
singularli difficult task of carri out her own principl, and 
make herself subordin.

“it is come round as i thought, susan,” said caleb, when thei 
seat alon in the even. he had alreadi narrat the 
which had brought about fred’s share in hi work, but had kept 
the further result. “the children _ar_ fond of each other—i mean, 
and mari.”

mr. garth laid her work on her knee, and fix her penetr 
anxious on her husband.

“after we’d done our work, fred pour it all out to me. he can’t 
to be a clergyman, and mari sai she won’t have him if he is on; 
the lad would like to be under me and give hi mind to busi. 
i’ve determin to take him and make a man of him.”

“caleb!” said mr. garth, in a deep contralto, express of 
astonish.

“it’s a fine thing to do,” said mr. garth, settl himself 
against the back of hi chair, and grasp the elbow. “i shall 
troubl with him, but i think i shall carri it through. the lad 
mari, and a true love for a good woman is a great thing, susan. 
shape mani a rough fellow.”

“ha mari spoken to you on the subject?” said mr garth, secretli 
littl hurt that she had to be inform on it herself.

“not a word. i ask her about fred onc; i gave her a bit of 
warn. but she assur me she would never marri an 
self-indulg man—noth sinc. but it seem fred set on mr.
farebroth to talk to her, becaus she had forbidden him to 
himself, and mr. farebroth ha found out that she is fond of fred,
but sai he must not be a clergyman. fred’s heart is fix on mari,
that i can see: it give me a good opinion of the lad—and we 
like him, susan.”

“it is a piti for mari, i think,” said mr. garth.

“why—a piti?”

“becaus, caleb, she might have had a man who is worth twenti 
vinci’s.”

“ah?” said caleb, with surpris.

“i firmli believ that mr. farebroth is attach to her, and meant 
make her an offer; but of cours, now that fred ha us him as 
envoi, there is an end to that better prospect.” there wa a 
precis in mr. garth’s utter. she wa vex and disappoint,
but she wa bent on abstain from useless word.

caleb wa silent a few moment under a conflict of feel. he 
at the floor and move hi head and hand in accompani to 
inward argument. at last he said—

“that would have made me veri proud and happi, susan, and i should 
been glad for your sake. i’ve alwai felt that your belong 
never been on a level with you. but you took me, though i wa a 
man.”

“i took the best and cleverest man i had ever known,” said mr. garth,
convinc that _she_ would never have love ani on who came short 
that mark.

“well, perhap other thought you might have done better. but it 
have been wors for me. and that is what touch me close about fred.
the lad is good at bottom, and clever enough to do, if he’s put in 
right wai; and he love and honor my daughter beyond anyth, and 
ha given him a sort of promis accord to what he turn out. i sai,
that young man’s soul is in my hand; and i’ll do the best i can 
him, so help me god! it’s my duti, susan.”

mr. garth wa not given to tear, but there wa a larg on 
down her face befor her husband had finish. it came from 
pressur of variou feel, in which there wa much affect 
some vexat. she wipe it awai quickli, sai—

“few men besid you would think it a duti to add to their anxieti 
that wai, caleb.”

“that signifi noth—what other men would think. i’ve got a 
feel insid me, and that i shall follow; and i hope your heart 
go with me, susan, in make everyth as light as can be to mari,
poor child.”

caleb, lean back in hi chair, look with anxiou appeal 
hi wife. she rose and kiss him, sai, “god bless you, caleb! 
children have a good father.”

but she went out and had a hearti cry to make up for the suppress 
her word. she felt sure that her husband’s conduct would 
misunderstood, and about fred she wa ration and unhop. 
would turn out to have the more foresight in it—her ration 
caleb’s ardent generos?

when fred went to the offic the next morn, there wa a test to 
gone through which he wa not prepar for.

“now fred,” said caleb, “you will have some desk-work. i have 
done a good deal of write myself, but i can’t do without help, and 
i want you to understand the account and get the valu into 
head, i mean to do without anoth clerk. so you must buckl to. 
ar you at write and arithmet?”

fred felt an awkward movement of the heart; he had not thought 
desk-work; but he wa in a resolut mood, and not go to shrink. “i’
not afraid of arithmet, mr. garth: it alwai came easili to me. 
think you know my write.”

“let us see,” said caleb, take up a pen, examin it carefulli 
hand it, well dip, to fred with a sheet of rule paper. “copi 
a line or two of that valuat, with the figur at the end.”

at that time the opinion exist that it wa beneath a gentleman 
write legibl, or with a hand in the least suitabl to a clerk. 
wrote the line demand in a hand as gentlemanli as that of 
viscount or bishop of the dai: the vowel were all alik and 
conson onli distinguish as turn up or down, the stroke 
a blot solid and the letter disdain to keep the line—in short,
it wa a manuscript of that vener kind easi to interpret when 
know beforehand what the writer mean.

as caleb look on, hi visag show a grow depress, but 
fred hand him the paper he gave someth like a snarl, and 
the paper passion with the back of hi hand. bad work like 
dispel all caleb’s mild.

“the deuc!” he exclaim, snarlingli. “to think that thi is a 
where a man’s educ mai cost hundr and hundr, and it 
you out thi!” then in a more pathet tone, push up hi 
and look at the unfortun scribe, “the lord have merci on us,
fred, i can’t put up with thi!”

“what can i do, mr. garth?” said fred, whose spirit had sunk veri low,
not onli at the estim of hi handwrit, but at the vision 
himself as liabl to be rank with offic clerk.

“do? why, you must learn to form your letter and keep the line. what’
the us of write at all if nobodi can understand it?” ask caleb,
energet, quit preoccupi with the bad qualiti of the work. “
there so littl busi in the world that you must be send 
over the countri? but that’s the wai peopl ar brought up. i 
lose no end of time with the letter some peopl send me, if susan 
not make them out for me. it’s disgust.” here caleb toss the 
from him.

ani stranger peep into the offic at that moment might have 
what wa the drama between the indign man of busi, and 
fine-look young fellow whose blond complexion wa get 
patchi as he bit hi lip with mortif. fred wa struggl 
mani thought. mr. garth had been so kind and encourag at 
begin of their interview, that gratitud and hope had 
at a high pitch, and the downfal wa proportion. he had not 
of desk-work—in fact, like the major of young gentlemen, he 
an occup which should be free from disagre. i cannot 
what might have been the consequ if he had not distinctli 
himself that he would go to lowick to see mari and tell her that he 
engag to work under her father. he did not like to disappoint 
there.

“i am veri sorri,” were all the word that he could muster. but mr.
garth wa alreadi relent.

“we must make the best of it, fred,” he began, with a return to 
usual quiet tone. “everi man can learn to write. i taught myself. go 
it with a will, and sit up at night if the dai-time isn’t enough. we’
be patient, my boi. callum shall go on with the book for a bit, 
you ar learn. but now i must be off,” said caleb, rise. “you 
let your father know our agreement. you’ll save me callum’s salari, 
know, when you can write; and i can afford to give you eighti 
for the first year, and more after.”

when fred made the necessari disclosur to hi parent, the 
effect on the two wa a surpris which enter veri deepli into 
memori. he went straight from mr. garth’s offic to the warehous,
rightli feel that the most respect wai in which he could 
to hi father wa to make the pain commun as grave 
formal as possibl. moreov, the decis would be more 
understood to be final, if the interview took place in hi father’
gravest hour, which were alwai those spent in hi privat room at 
warehous.

fred enter on the subject directli, and declar briefli what he 
done and wa resolv to do, express at the end hi regret that 
should be the caus of disappoint to hi father, and take 
blame on hi own defici. the regret wa genuin, and 
fred with strong, simpl word.

mr. vinci listen in profound surpris without utter even 
exclam, a silenc which in hi impati tempera wa a sign 
unusu emot. he had not been in good spirit about trade 
morn, and the slight bitter in hi lip grew intens as 
listen. when fred had end, there wa a paus of nearli a minut,
dure which mr. vinci replac a book in hi desk and turn the 
emphat. then he look at hi son steadili, and said—

“so you’ve made up your mind at last, sir?”

“ye, father.”

“veri well; stick to it. i’ve no more to sai. you’ve thrown awai 
educ, and gone down a step in life, when i had given you the 
of rise, that’s all.”

“i am veri sorri that we differ, father. i think i can be quit as 
of a gentleman at the work i have undertaken, as if i had been 
curat. but i am grate to you for wish to do the best for me.”

“veri well; i have no more to sai. i wash my hand of you. i onli hope,
when you have a son of your own he will make a better return for 
pain you spend on him.”

thi wa veri cut to fred. hi father wa us that 
advantag possess by us all when we ar in a pathet situat 
see our own past as if it were simpli part of the patho. in realiti,
mr. vinci’s wish about hi son had had a great deal of pride,
inconsider, and egoist folli in them. but still 
disappoint father held a strong lever; and fred felt as if he 
be banish with a maledict.

“i hope you will not object to my remain at home, sir?” he said,
after rise to go; “i shall have a suffici salari to pai for 
board, as of cours i should wish to do.”

“board be hang!” said mr. vinci, recov himself in hi disgust 
the notion that fred’s keep would be miss at hi tabl. “of 
your mother will want you to stai. but i shall keep no hors for you,
you understand; and you will pai your own tailor. you will do with 
suit or two less, i fanci, when you have to pai for ’em.”

fred linger; there wa still someth to be said. at last it came.

“i hope you will shake hand with me, father, and forgiv me 
vexat i have caus you.”

mr. vinci from hi chair threw a quick glanc upward at hi son, 
had advanc near to him, and then gave hi hand, sai hurriedli,
“ye, ye, let us sai no more.”

fred went through much more narr and explan with hi mother,
but she wa inconsol, have befor her ey what perhap 
husband had never thought of, the certainti that fred would marri 
garth, that her life would henceforth be spoil by a 
infus of garth and their wai, and that her darl boi, with 
beauti face and stylish air “beyond anybodi els’s son 
middlemarch,” would be sure to get like that famili in plain 
appear and careless about hi cloth. to her it seem 
there wa a garth conspiraci to get possess of the desir fred,
but she dare not enlarg on thi opinion, becaus a slight hint of 
had made him “fly out” at her as he had never done befor. her 
wa too sweet for her to show ani anger, but she felt that 
happi had receiv a bruis, and for sever dai mere to look 
fred made her cry a littl as if he were the subject of some 
propheci. perhap she wa the slower to recov her usual 
becaus fred had warn her that she must not reopen the sore 
with hi father, who had accept hi decis and forgiven him. if 
husband had been vehement against fred, she would have been urg 
defenc of her darl. it wa the end of the fourth dai when mr. 
said to her—

“come, luci, my dear, don’t be so down-heart. you alwai have 
the boi, and you must go on spoil him.”

“noth ever did cut me so befor, vinci,” said the wife, her 
throat and chin begin to trembl again, “onli hi ill.”

“pooh, pooh, never mind! we must expect to have troubl with 
children. don’t make it wors by let me see you out of spirit.”

“well, i won’t,” said mr. vinci, rous by thi appeal and 
herself with a littl shake as of a bird which lai down it 
plumag.

“it won’t do to begin make a fuss about on,” said mr. vinci, 
to combin a littl grumbl with domest cheer. “there’
rosamond as well as fred.”

“ye, poor thing. i’m sure i felt for her be disappoint of 
babi; but she got over it nice.”

“babi, pooh! i can see lydgat is make a mess of hi practic, 
get into debt too, by what i hear. i shall have rosamond come 
me with a pretti tale on of these dai. but thei’ll get no monei 
me, i know. let _hi_ famili help him. i never did like that marriag.
but it’s no us talk. ring the bell for lemon, and don’t look 
ani more, luci. i’ll drive you and louisa to riverston to-morrow.”




chapter lvii.

thei number scarc eight summer when a 
    rose on their soul and stir such motion 
as thrill the bud and shape their hidden 
    at penetr of the quicken air:
hi name who told of loyal evan dhu,
    of quaint bradwardin, and vich ian vor,
make the littl world their childhood 
    larg with a land of mountain lake and scaur,
and larger yet with wonder, love, 
    toward walter scott who live far 
sent them thi wealth of joi and nobl grief.
    the book and thei must part, but dai by dai,
        in line that thwart like portli spider 
        thei wrote the tale, from tulli veolan.


the even that fred vinci walk to lowick parsonag (he had begun 
see that thi wa a world in which even a spirit young man 
sometim walk for want of a hors to carri him) he set out at 
o’clock and call on mr. garth by the wai, wish to assur 
that she accept their new relat willingli.

he found the famili group, dog and cat includ, under the 
appl-tree in the orchard. it wa a festiv with mr. garth, for 
eldest son, christi, her peculiar joi and pride, had come home for 
short holidai—christi, who held it the most desir thing in 
world to be a tutor, to studi all literatur and be a 
porson, and who wa an incorpor critic on poor fred, a sort 
object-lesson given to him by the educ mother. christi himself,
a squar-brow, broad-shoulder masculin edit of hi mother 
much higher than fred’s shoulder—which made it the harder that 
should be held superior—wa alwai as simpl as possibl, and 
no more of fred’s disinclin to scholarship than of a giraff’s,
wish that he himself were more of the same height. he wa ly 
the ground now by hi mother’s chair, with hi straw hat laid flat 
hi ey, while jim on the other side wa read aloud from 
belov writer who ha made a chief part in the happi of mani 
live. the volum wa “ivanho,” and jim wa in the great archeri 
at the tournament, but suffer much interrupt from ben, who 
fetch hi own old bow and arrow, and wa make himself 
disagre, letti thought, by beg all present to observ 
random shot, which no on wish to do except browni, 
activ-mind but probabl shallow mongrel, while the 
newfoundland ly in the sun look on with the dull-ei 
of extrem old ag. letti herself, show as to her mouth and 
some slight sign that she had been assist at the gather of 
cherri which stood in a coral-heap on the tea-tabl, wa now 
on the grass, listen open-ei to the read.

but the centr of interest wa chang for all by the arriv of 
vinci. when, seat himself on a garden-stool, he said that he wa 
hi wai to lowick parsonag, ben, who had thrown down hi bow, 
snatch up a reluct half-grown kitten instead, strode across fred’
outstretch leg, and said “take me!”

“oh, and me too,” said letti.

“you can’t keep up with fred and me,” said ben.

“ye, i can. mother, pleas sai that i am to go,” urg letti, 
life wa much checker by resist to her depreci as a girl.

“i shall stai with christi,” observ jim; as much as to sai that 
had the advantag of those simpleton; whereupon letti put her hand 
to her head and look with jealou indecis from the on to 
other.

“let us all go and see mari,” said christi, open hi arm.

“no, my dear child, we must not go in a swarm to the parsonag. 
that old glasgow suit of your would never do. besid, your 
will come home. we must let fred go alon. he can tell mari that 
ar here, and she will come back to-morrow.”

christi glanc at hi own threadbar knee, and then at fred’
beauti white trouser. certainli fred’s tailor suggest 
advantag of an english univers, and he had a grace wai even 
look warm and of push hi hair back with hi handkerchief.

“children, run awai,” said mr. garth; “it is too warm to hang 
your friend. take your brother and show him the rabbit.”

the eldest understood, and led off the children immedi. fred 
that mr. garth wish to give him an opportun of sai anyth 
had to sai, but he could onli begin by observ—

“how glad you must be to have christi here!”

“ye; he ha come sooner than i expect. he got down from the coach 
nine o’clock, just after hi father went out. i am long for caleb 
come and hear what wonder progress christi is make. he ha 
hi expens for the last year by give lesson, carri on 
studi at the same time. he hope soon to get a privat tutorship and 
abroad.”

“he is a great fellow,” said fred, to whom these cheer truth had 
medicin tast, “and no troubl to anybodi.” after a slight paus, 
ad, “but i fear you will think that i am go to be a great deal 
troubl to mr. garth.”

“caleb like take troubl: he is on of those men who alwai do 
than ani on would have thought of ask them to do,” answer mr.
garth. she wa knit, and could either look at fred or not, as 
chose—alwai an advantag when on is bent on load speech 
salutari mean; and though mr. garth intend to be duli reserv,
she did wish to sai someth that fred might be the better for.

“i know you think me veri undeserv, mr. garth, and with 
reason,” said fred, hi spirit rise a littl at the percept 
someth like a disposit to lectur him. “i happen to have 
just the worst to the peopl i can’t help wish for the most from.
but while two men like mr. garth and mr. farebroth have not given 
up, i don’t see why i should give myself up.” fred thought it might 
well to suggest these masculin exampl to mr. garth.

“assuredli,” said she, with gather emphasi. “a young man for 
two such elder had devot themselv would inde be culpabl if 
threw himself awai and made their sacrific vain.”

fred wonder a littl at thi strong languag, but onli said, “i 
it will not be so with me, mr. garth, sinc i have some 
to believ that i mai win mari. mr. garth ha told you about that? 
were not surpris, i dare sai?” fred end, innoc refer 
to hi own love as probabl evid enough.

“not surpris that mari ha given you encourag?” return mr.
garth, who thought it would be well for fred to be more aliv to 
fact that mari’s friend could not possibl have wish 
beforehand, whatev the vinci might suppos. “ye, i confess i 
surpris.”

“she never did give me ani—not the least in the world, when i talk 
her myself,” said fred, eager to vindic mari. “but when i ask mr.
farebroth to speak for me, she allow him to tell me there wa 
hope.”

the power of admonit which had begun to stir in mr. garth had 
yet discharg itself. it wa a littl too provok even for _her_
self-control that thi bloom youngster should flourish on 
disappoint of sadder and wiser peopl—make a meal of 
nightingal and never know it—and that all the while hi 
should suppos that her wa in eager need of thi sprig; and 
vexat had ferment the more activ becaus of it 
repress toward her husband. exemplari wive will sometim 
scapegoat in thi wai. she now said with energet decis, “you 
a great mistak, fred, in ask mr. farebroth to speak for you.”

“did i?” said fred, redden instantan. he wa alarm, but at 
loss to know what mr. garth meant, and ad, in an apologet tone,
“mr. farebroth ha alwai been such a friend of our; and mari, 
knew, would listen to him grave; and he took it on himself 
readili.”

“ye, young peopl ar usual blind to everyth but their 
wish, and seldom imagin how much those wish cost other,” 
mr. garth. she did not mean to go beyond thi salutari 
doctrin, and threw her indign into a needless unwind of 
worst, knit her brow at it with a grand air.

“i cannot conceiv how it could be ani pain to mr. farebroth,” 
fred, who nevertheless felt that surpris concept were 
to form themselv.

“precis; you cannot conceiv,” said mr. garth, cut her word 
neatli as possibl.

for a moment fred look at the horizon with a dismai anxieti, 
then turn with a quick movement said almost sharpli—

“do you mean to sai, mr. garth, that mr. farebroth is in love 
mari?”

“and if it were so, fred, i think you ar the last person who ought 
be surpris,” return mr. garth, lai her knit down besid 
and fold her arm. it wa an unwont sign of emot in her 
she should put her work out of her hand. in fact her feel 
divid between the satisfact of give fred hi disciplin and 
sens of have gone a littl too far. fred took hi hat and stick 
rose quickli.

“then you think i am stand in hi wai, and in mari’s too?” he said,
in a tone which seem to demand an answer.

mr. garth could not speak immedi. she had brought herself 
the unpleas posit of be call on to sai what she realli felt,
yet what she knew there were strong reason for conceal. and to 
the conscious of have exceed in word wa 
mortifi. besid, fred had given out unexpect electr, and 
now ad, “mr. garth seem pleas that mari should be attach 
me. he could not have known anyth of thi.”

mr. garth felt a sever twing at thi mention of her husband, 
fear that caleb might think her in the wrong not be 
endur. she answer, want to check unintend consequ—

“i spoke from infer onli. i am not awar that mari know 
of the matter.”

but she hesit to beg that he would keep entir silenc on a 
which she had herself unnecessarili mention, not be us to 
in that wai; and while she wa hesit there wa alreadi a rush 
unintend consequ under the appl-tree where the tea-
stood. ben, bounc across the grass with browni at hi heel, 
see the kitten drag the knit by a lengthen line of wool,
shout and clap hi hand; browni bark, the kitten, desper,
jump on the tea-tabl and upset the milk, then jump down again 
swept half the cherri with it; and ben, snatch up the half-
sock-top, fit it over the kitten’s head as a new sourc of mad,
while letti arriv cri out to her mother against thi cruelti—
wa a histori as full of sensat as “thi is the hous that 
built.” mr. garth wa oblig to interfer, the other young on 
up and the _tête-à-tête_ with fred wa end. he got awai as soon as 
could, and mr. garth could onli impli some retract of 
sever by sai “god bless you” when she shook hand with him.

she wa unpleasantli consciou that she had been on the verg 
speak as “on of the foolish women speaketh”—tell first 
entreat silenc after. but she had not entreat silenc, and 
prevent caleb’s blame she determin to blame herself and confess 
to him that veri night. it wa curiou what an aw tribun the 
caleb’s wa to her, whenev he set it up. but she meant to point 
to him that the revel might do fred vinci a great deal of good.

no doubt it wa have a strong effect on him as he walk to lowick.
fred’s light hope natur had perhap never had so much of a 
as from thi suggest that if he had been out of the wai mari 
have made a thoroughli good match. also he wa piqu that he had 
what he call such a stupid lout as to ask that intervent from mr.
farebroth. but it wa not in a lover’s natur—it wa not in fred’s,
that the new anxieti rais about mari’s feel should not 
everi other. notwithstand hi trust in mr. farebroth’s generos,
notwithstand what mari had said to him, fred could not help 
that he had a rival: it wa a new conscious, and he object to 
extrem, not be in the least readi to give up mari for her good,
be readi rather to fight for her with ani man whatsoev. but 
fight with mr. farebroth must be of a metaphor kind, which 
much more difficult to fred than the muscular. certainli 
experi wa a disciplin for fred hardli less sharp than 
disappoint about hi uncl’s will. the iron had not enter 
hi soul, but he had begun to imagin what the sharp edg would be. 
did not onc occur to fred that mr. garth might be mistaken about mr.
farebroth, but he suspect that she might be wrong about mari. 
had been stai at the parsonag late, and her mother might 
veri littl of what had been pass in her mind.

he did not feel easier when he found her look cheer with 
three ladi in the draw-room. thei were in anim discuss 
some subject which wa drop when he enter, and mari wa 
the label from a heap of shallow cabinet drawer, in a 
handwrit which she wa skill in. mr. farebroth wa somewher 
the villag, and the three ladi knew noth of fred’s 
relat to mari: it wa imposs for either of them to propos 
thei should walk round the garden, and fred predict to himself 
he should have to go awai without sai a word to her in privat. 
told her first of christi’s arriv and then of hi own engag 
her father; and he wa comfort by see that thi latter 
touch her keenli. she said hurriedli, “i am so glad,” and then 
over her write to hinder ani on from notic her face. but here 
a subject which mr. farebroth could not let pass.

“you don’t mean, my dear miss garth, that you ar glad to hear of 
young man give up the church for which he wa educ: you onli 
that thing be so, you ar glad that he should be under an 
man like your father.”

“no, realli, mr. farebroth, i am glad of both, i fear,” said mari,
cleverli get rid of on rebelli tear. “i have a 
secular mind. i never like ani clergyman except the vicar of 
and mr. farebroth.”

“now why, my dear?” said mr. farebroth, paus on her larg 
knit-needl and look at mari. “you have alwai a good 
for your opinion, but thi astonish me. of cours i put out of 
question those who preach new doctrin. but why should you 
clergymen?”

“oh dear,” said mari, her face break into merriment as she seem 
consid a moment, “i don’t like their neckcloth.”

“why, you don’t like camden’s, then,” said miss winifr, in 
anxieti.

“ye, i do,” said mari. “i don’t like the other clergymen’s neckcloth,
becaus it is thei who wear them.”

“how veri puzzl!” said miss nobl, feel that her own 
wa probabl defici.

“my dear, you ar joke. you would have better reason than these 
slight so respect a class of men,” said mr. farebroth,
majest.

“miss garth ha such sever notion of what peopl should be that it 
difficult to satisfi her,” said fred.

“well, i am glad at least that she make an except in favor of 
son,” said the old ladi.

mari wa wonder at fred’s piqu tone, when mr. farebroth came 
and had to hear the new about the engag under mr. garth. at 
end he said with quiet satisfact, “_that_ is right;” and then 
to look at mari’s label and prais her handwrit. fred felt 
jealou—wa glad, of cours, that mr. farebroth wa so estim, 
wish that he had been ugli and fat as men at forti sometim ar. 
wa clear what the end would be, sinc mari openli place 
abov everybodi, and these women were all evid encourag 
affair. he wa feel sure that he should have no chanc of 
to mari, when mr. farebroth said—

“fred, help me to carri these drawer back into my studi—you have 
seen my fine new studi. prai come too, miss garth. i want you to see 
stupend spider i found thi morn.”

mari at onc saw the vicar’s intent. he had never sinc 
memor even deviat from hi old pastor kind toward her,
and her momentari wonder and doubt had quit gone to sleep. mari 
accustom to think rather rigor of what wa probabl, and if 
belief flatter her vaniti she felt warn to dismiss it 
ridicul, have earli had much exercis in such dismiss. it 
as she had foreseen: when fred had been ask to admir the fit 
the studi, and she had been ask to admir the spider, mr. 
said—

“wait here a minut or two. i am go to look out an engrav 
fred is tall enough to hang for me. i shall be back in a few minut.”
and then he went out. nevertheless, the first word fred said to 
wa—

“it is of no us, whatev i do, mari. you ar sure to 
farebroth at last.” there wa some rage in hi tone.

“what do you mean, fred?” mari exclaim indignantli, blush deepli,
and surpris out of all her readi in repli.

“it is imposs that you should not see it all clearli enough—you 
see everyth.”

“i onli see that you ar behav veri ill, fred, in speak so of mr.
farebroth after he ha plead your caus in everi wai. how can 
have taken up such an idea?”

fred wa rather deep, in spite of hi irrit. if mari had 
been unsuspici, there wa no good in tell her what mr. garth 
said.

“it follow as a matter of cours,” he repli. “when you 
continu see a man who beat me in everyth, and whom you 
up abov everybodi, i can have no fair chanc.”

“you ar veri ungrat, fred,” said mari. “i wish i had never 
mr. farebroth that i care for you in the least.”

“no, i am not ungrat; i should be the happiest fellow in the 
if it were not for thi. i told your father everyth, and he wa 
kind; he treat me as if i were hi son. i could go at the work with 
will, write and everyth, if it were not for thi.”

“for thi? for what?” said mari, imagin now that someth 
must have been said or done.

“thi dread certainti that i shall be bowl out by farebroth.”
mari wa appeas by her inclin to laugh.

“fred,” she said, peep round to catch hi ey, which were 
turn awai from her, “you ar too delightfulli ridicul. if you 
not such a charm simpleton, what a temptat thi would be to 
the wick coquett, and let you suppos that somebodi besid you 
made love to me.”

“do you realli like me best, mari?” said fred, turn ey full 
affect on her, and try to take her hand.

“i don’t like you at all at thi moment,” said mari, retreat, 
put her hand behind her. “i onli said that no mortal ever 
love to me besid you. and that is no argument that a veri wise 
ever will,” she end, merrili.

“i wish you would tell me that you could not possibl ever think 
him,” said fred.

“never dare to mention thi ani more to me, fred,” said mari, 
seriou again. “i don’t know whether it is more stupid or ungener 
you not to see that mr. farebroth ha left us togeth on 
that we might speak freeli. i am disappoint that you should be 
blind to hi delic feel.”

there wa no time to sai ani more befor mr. farebroth came back 
the engrav; and fred had to return to the draw-room still with 
jealou dread in hi heart, but yet with comfort argument 
mari’s word and manner. the result of the convers wa on 
whole more pain to mari: inevit her attent had taken a 
attitud, and she saw the possibl of new interpret. she 
in a posit in which she seem to herself to be slight mr.
farebroth, and thi, in relat to a man who is much honor, 
alwai danger to the firm of a grate woman. to have a 
for go home the next dai wa a relief, for mari earnestli desir 
be alwai clear that she love fred best. when a tender affect 
been store itself in us through mani of our year, the idea that 
could accept ani exchang for it seem to be a cheapen of our live.
and we can set a watch over our affect and our constanc as we 
over other treasur.

“fred ha lost all hi other expect; he must keep thi,” 
said to herself, with a smile curl her lip. it wa imposs 
help fleet vision of anoth kind—new digniti and an 
valu of which she had often felt the absenc. but these thing 
fred outsid them, fred forsaken and look sad for the want of her,
could never tempt her deliber thought.




chapter lviii.

“for there can live no hatr in thine ey,
therefor in that i cannot know thy chang:
in mani’s look the fals heart’s 
is writ in mood and frown and wrinkl strang:
but heaven in thy creation did 
that in thy face sweet love should ever dwell:
whate’er thy thought or thy heart’s work 
thy look should noth thenc but sweet tell.”
—shakespear: _sonnet_.


at the time when mr. vinci utter that presenti about rosamond,
she herself had never had the idea that she should be driven to 
the sort of appeal which he foresaw. she had not yet had ani 
about wai and mean, although her domest life had been expens 
well as event. her babi had been born prematur, and all 
embroid robe and cap had to be laid by in dark. 
misfortun wa attribut entir to her have persist in go 
on horseback on dai when her husband had desir her not to do so; 
it must not be suppos that she had shown temper on the occas, 
rude told him that she would do as she like.

what led her particularli to desir hors-exercis wa a visit 
captain lydgat, the baronet’s third son, who, i am sorri to sai, 
detest by our tertiu of that name as a vapid fop “part hi 
from brow to nape in a despic fashion” (not follow by 
himself), and show an ignor secur that he knew the 
thing to sai on everi topic. lydgat inwardli curs hi own folli 
he had drawn down thi visit by consent to go to hi uncl’s on 
wed-tour, and he made himself rather disagre to rosamond 
sai so in privat. for to rosamond thi visit wa a sourc 
unpreced but gracefulli conceal exult. she wa so 
consciou of have a cousin who wa a baronet’s son stai in 
hous, that she imagin the knowledg of what wa impli by 
presenc to be diffus through all other mind; and when 
introduc captain lydgat to her guest, she had a placid sens 
hi rank penetr them as if it had been an odor. the 
wa enough for the time to melt awai some disappoint in 
condit of marriag with a medic man even of good birth: it 
now that her marriag wa visibl as well as ideal float her 
the middlemarch level, and the futur look bright with letter 
visit to and from quallingham, and vagu advanc in 
for tertiu. especi as, probabl at the captain’s suggest, 
marri sister, mr. mengan, had come with her maid, and stai 
night on her wai from town. henc it wa clearli worth while 
rosamond to take pain with her music and the care select of 
lace.

as to captain lydgat himself, hi low brow, hi aquilin nose bent 
on side, and hi rather heavi utter, might have 
disadvantag in ani young gentleman who had not a militari 
and mustach to give him what is dote on by some flower-like 
head as “style.” he had, moreov, that sort of high-breed 
consist in be free from the petti solicitud of middl-
gentil, and he wa a great critic of feminin charm. 
delight in hi admir now even more than she had done 
quallingham, and he found it easi to spend sever hour of the dai 
flirt with her. the visit altogeth wa on of the 
lark he had ever had, not the less so perhap becaus he 
that hi queer cousin tertiu wish him awai: though lydgat, 
would rather (hyperbol speak) have di than have fail 
polit hospit, suppress hi dislik, and onli 
gener not to hear what the gallant offic said, consign 
task of answer him to rosamond. for he wa not at all a 
husband, and prefer leav a feather-head young gentleman 
with hi wife to bear him compani.

“i wish you would talk more to the captain at dinner, tertiu,” 
rosamond, on even when the import guest wa gone to loamford 
see some brother offic station there. “you realli look so 
sometim—you seem to be see through hi head into someth 
it, instead of look at him.”

“my dear rosi, you don’t expect me to talk much to such a conceit 
as that, i hope,” said lydgat, brusqu. “if he got hi head broken,
i might look at it with interest, not befor.”

“i cannot conceiv why you should speak of your cousin 
contemptu,” said rosamond, her finger move at her work 
she spoke with a mild graviti which had a touch of disdain in it.

“ask ladislaw if he doesn’t think your captain the greatest bore 
ever met with. ladislaw ha almost forsaken the hous sinc he came.”

rosamond thought she knew perfectli well why mr. ladislaw dislik 
captain: he wa jealou, and she like hi be jealou.

“it is imposs to sai what will suit eccentr person,” 
answer, “but in my opinion captain lydgat is a thorough gentleman,
and i think you ought not, out of respect to sir godwin, to treat 
with neglect.”

“no, dear; but we have had dinner for him. and he come in and 
out as he like. he doesn’t want me.”

“still, when he is in the room, you might show him more attent. 
mai not be a phoenix of clever in your sens; hi profess 
differ; but it would be all the better for you to talk a littl 
hi subject. _i_ think hi convers is quit agreeabl. and he 
anyth but an unprincipl man.”

“the fact is, you would wish me to be a littl more like him, rosi,”
said lydgat, in a sort of resign murmur, with a smile which wa 
exactli tender, and certainli not merri. rosamond wa silent and 
not smile again; but the love curv of her face look good-
enough without smile.

those word of lydgat’s were like a sad mileston mark how far 
had travel from hi old dreamland, in which rosamond vinci 
to be that perfect piec of womanhood who would rever her husband’
mind after the fashion of an accomplish mermaid, us her comb 
look-glass and sing her song for the relax of hi 
wisdom alon. he had begun to distinguish between that 
ador and the attract toward a man’s talent becaus it 
him prestig, and is like an order in hi button-hole or an 
befor hi name.

it might have been suppos that rosamond had travel too, sinc 
had found the pointless convers of mr. ned plymdal 
wearisom; but to most mortal there is a stupid which 
unendur and a stupid which is altogeth accept—els,
inde, what would becom of social bond? captain lydgat’s 
wa delic scent, carri itself with “style,” talk with a 
accent, and wa close relat to sir godwin. rosamond found it 
agreeabl and caught mani of it phrase.

therefor sinc rosamond, as we know, wa fond of horseback, there 
plenti of reason why she should be tempt to resum her ride 
captain lydgat, who had order hi man with two hors to follow 
and put up at the “green dragon,” beg her to go out on the 
which he warrant to be gentl and train to carri a ladi—inde, 
had bought it for hi sister, and wa take it to quallingham.
rosamond went out the first time without tell her husband, and 
back befor hi return; but the ride had been so thorough a success,
and she declar herself so much the better in consequ, that he 
inform of it with full relianc on hi consent that she should 
ride again.

on the contrari lydgat wa more than hurt—he wa utterli 
that she had risk herself on a strang hors without refer 
matter to hi wish. after the first almost thunder exclam 
astonish, which suffici warn rosamond of what wa come, 
wa silent for some moment.

“howev, you have come back safe,” he said, at last, in a 
tone. “you will not go again, rosi; that is understood. if it were 
quietest, most familiar hors in the world, there would alwai be 
chanc of accid. and you know veri well that i wish you to give 
ride the roan on that account.”

“but there is the chanc of accid indoor, tertiu.”

“my darl, don’t talk nonsens,” said lydgat, in an implor tone;
“sure i am the person to judg for you. i think it is enough that 
sai you ar not to go again.”

rosamond wa arrang her hair befor dinner, and the reflect 
her head in the glass show no chang in it loveli except 
littl turn asid of the long neck. lydgat had been move 
with hi hand in hi pocket, and now paus near her, as if 
await some assur.

“i wish you would fasten up my plait, dear,” said rosamond, 
her arm fall with a littl sigh, so as to make a husband asham 
stand there like a brute. lydgat had often fasten the 
befor, be among the deftest of men with hi larg fine 
finger. he swept up the soft festoon of plait and fasten in 
tall comb (to such us do men come!); and what could he do then 
kiss the exquisit nape which wa shown in all it delic curv? 
when we do what we have done befor, it is often with a differ.
lydgat wa still angri, and had not forgotten hi point.

“i shall tell the captain that he ought to have known better than 
you hi hors,” he said, as he move awai.

“i beg you will not do anyth of the kind, tertiu,” said rosamond,
look at him with someth more mark than usual in her speech. “
will be treat me as if i were a child. promis that you will 
the subject to me.”

there did seem to be some truth in her object. lydgat said, “
well,” with a surli obedi, and thu the discuss end with 
promis rosamond, and not with her promis him.

in fact, she had been determin not to promis. rosamond had 
victori obstinaci which never wast it energi in 
resist. what she like to do wa to her the right thing, and 
her clever wa direct to get the mean of do it. she 
to go out ride again on the grai, and she did go on the 
opportun of her husband’s absenc, not intend that he should 
until it wa late enough not to signifi to her. the temptat 
certainli great: she wa veri fond of the exercis, and 
gratif of ride on a fine hors, with captain lydgat, 
godwin’s son, on anoth fine hors by her side, and of be met 
thi posit by ani on but her husband, wa someth as good as 
dream befor marriag: moreov she wa rivet the connect 
the famili at quallingham, which must be a wise thing to do.

but the gentl grai, unprepar for the crash of a tree that wa 
fell on the edg of halsel wood, took fright, and caus a 
fright to rosamond, lead final to the loss of her babi. 
could not show hi anger toward her, but he wa rather bearish to 
captain, whose visit natur soon came to an end.

in all futur convers on the subject, rosamond wa mildli 
that the ride had made no differ, and that if she had stai 
home the same symptom would have come on and would have end in 
same wai, becaus she had felt someth like them befor.

lydgat could onli sai, “poor, poor darl!”—but he secretli 
over the terribl tenac of thi mild creatur. there wa 
within him an amaz sens of hi powerless over rosamond. 
superior knowledg and mental forc, instead of be, as he 
imagin, a shrine to consult on all occas, wa simpli set asid 
everi practic question. he had regard rosamond’s clever 
precis of the recept kind which becam a woman. he wa 
begin to find out what that clever wa—what wa the shape 
which it had run as into a close network aloof and independ. no 
quicker than rosamond to see caus and effect which lai within 
track of her own tast and interest: she had seen clearli lydgat’
preemin in middlemarch societi, and could go on 
trace still more agreeabl social effect when hi talent should 
advanc him; but for her, hi profession and scientif ambit 
no other relat to these desir effect than if thei had been 
fortun discoveri of an ill-smell oil. and that oil apart, 
which she had noth to do, of cours she believ in her own 
more than she did in hi. lydgat wa astound to find in 
trifl matter, as well as in thi last seriou case of the ride,
that affect did not make her compliant. he had no doubt that 
affect wa there, and had no presenti that he had done 
to repel it. for hi own part he said to himself that he love her 
tenderli as ever, and could make up hi mind to her negat;
but—well! lydgat wa much worri, and consciou of new element 
hi life as noxiou to him as an inlet of mud to a creatur that 
been us to breath and bath and dart after it illumin prei 
the clearest of water.

rosamond wa soon look loveli than ever at her worktabl, 
drive in her father’s phaeton and think it like that she might 
invit to quallingham. she knew that she wa a much more 
ornament to the draw-room there than ani daughter of the famili, 
in reflect that the gentlemen were awar of that, did not 
suffici consid whether the ladi would be eager to 
themselv surpass.

lydgat, reliev from anxieti about her, relaps into what 
inwardli call hi moodi—a name which to her cover 
thought preoccup with other subject than herself, as well 
that uneasi look of the brow and distast for all ordinari thing as 
thei were mix with bitter herb, which realli made a sort 
weather-glass to hi vexat and forebod. these latter state 
mind had on caus amongst other, which he had gener 
mistakenli avoid mention to rosamond, lest it should affect 
health and spirit. between him and her inde there wa that 
miss of each other’s mental track, which is too evid 
even between person who ar continu think of each other. 
lydgat it seem that he had been spend month after month 
sacrif more than half of hi best intent and best power to 
tender for rosamond; bear her littl claim and 
without impati, and, abov all, bear without betray 
bitter to look through less and less of interf illus at 
blank unreflect surfac her mind present to hi ardor for the 
imperson end of hi profess and hi scientif studi, an 
which he had fanci that the ideal wife must somehow worship 
sublim, though not in the least know why. but hi endur 
mingl with a self-discont which, if we know how to be candid, 
shall confess to make more than half our bitter under grievanc,
wife or husband includ. it alwai remain true that if we had 
greater, circumst would have been less strong against us. 
wa awar that hi concess to rosamond were often littl more 
the laps of slacken resolut, the creep paralysi apt to 
an enthusiasm which is out of adjust to a constant portion of 
live. and on lydgat’s enthusiasm there wa constantli press not 
simpl weight of sorrow, but the bite presenc of a petti 
care, such as cast the blight of ironi over all higher effort.

thi wa the care which he had hitherto abstain from mention 
rosamond; and he believ, with some wonder, that it had never 
her mind, though certainli no difficulti could be less mysteri. 
wa an infer with a conspicu handl to it, and had been 
drawn by indiffer observ, that lydgat wa in debt; and he 
not succe in keep out of hi mind for long togeth that he 
everi dai get deeper into that swamp, which tempt men toward 
with such a pretti cover of flower and verdur. it is wonder 
soon a man get up to hi chin there—in a condit in which, in 
of himself, he is forc to think chiefli of releas, though he had 
scheme of the univers in hi soul.

eighteen month ago lydgat wa poor, but had never known the 
want of small sum, and felt rather a burn contempt for ani on 
descend a step in order to gain them. he wa now 
someth wors than a simpl deficit: he wa assail by the 
hate trial of a man who ha bought and us a great mani 
which might have been done without, and which he is unabl to pai for,
though the demand for payment ha becom press.

how thi came about mai be easili seen without much arithmet 
knowledg of price. when a man in set up a hous and prepar 
marriag find that hi furnitur and other initi expens come 
between four and five hundr pound more than he ha capit to 
for; when at the end of a year it appear that hi household expens,
hors and et caetera, amount to nearli a thousand, while the 
of the practic reckon from the old book to be worth eight 
per annum have sunk like a summer pond and make hardli five hundr,
chiefli in unpaid entri, the plain infer is that, whether 
mind it or not, he is in debt. those were less expens time 
our own, and provinci life wa compar modest; but the 
with which a medic man who had late bought a practic, who 
that he wa oblig to keep two hors, whose tabl wa 
without stint, and who paid an insur on hi life and a high 
for hous and garden, might find hi expens doubl hi receipt,
can be conceiv by ani on who doe not think these detail 
hi consider. rosamond, accustom from her childhood to 
extravag household, thought that good housekeep consist 
in order the best of everyth—noth els “answer;” and 
suppos that “if thing were done at all, thei must be 
properli”—he did not see how thei were to live otherwis. if each 
of household expenditur had been mention to him beforehand, he 
have probabl observ that “it could hardli come to much,” and if 
on had suggest a save on a particular articl—for exampl, 
substitut of cheap fish for dear—it would have appear to 
simpli a penni-wise, mean notion. rosamond, even without such 
occas as captain lydgat’s visit, wa fond of give invit,
and lydgat, though he often thought the guest tiresom, did 
interfer. thi sociabl seem a necessari part of 
prudenc, and the entertain must be suitabl. it is true 
wa constantli visit the home of the poor and adjust 
prescript of diet to their small mean; but, dear me! ha it not 
thi time ceas to be remark—is it not rather that we expect 
men, that thei should have numer strand of experi ly side 
side and never compar them with each other? expenditur—like 
and error—becom a total new thing when we attach our 
person to it, and measur it by that wide differ which 
manifest (in our own sensat) between ourselv and other. 
believ himself to be careless about hi dress, and he despis a 
who calcul the effect of hi costum; it seem to him onli 
matter of cours that he had abund of fresh garment—such 
were natur order in sheav. it must be rememb that he 
never hitherto felt the check of importun debt, and he walk 
habit, not by self-critic. but the check had come.

it novelti made it the more irrit. he wa amaz, disgust 
condit so foreign to all hi purpos, so hatefulli 
with the object he care to occupi himself with, should have lain 
ambush and clutch him when he wa unawar. and there wa not onli 
actual debt; there wa the certainti that in hi present posit 
must go on deepen it. two furnish tradesmen at brass, 
bill had been incur befor hi marriag, and whom 
current expens had ever sinc prevent him from pai, 
repeatedli sent him unpleas letter which had forc themselv 
hi attent. thi could hardli have been more gall to 
disposit than to lydgat’s, with hi intens pride—hi dislik 
ask a favor or be under an oblig to ani on. he had 
even to form conjectur about mr. vinci’s intent on monei matter,
and noth but extrem could have induc him to appli to 
father-in-law, even if he had not been made awar in variou 
wai sinc hi marriag that mr. vinci’s own affair were 
flourish, and that the expect of help from him would 
resent. some men easili trust in the readi of friend; it 
never in the former part of hi life occur to lydgat that he 
need to do so: he had never thought what borrow would be to him; 
now that the idea had enter hi mind, he felt that he would 
incur ani other hardship. in the mean time he had no monei or 
of monei; and hi practic wa not get more lucr.

no wonder that lydgat had been unabl to suppress all sign of 
troubl dure the last few month, and now that rosamond wa 
brilliant health, he medit take her entir into confid 
hi difficulti. new convers with tradesmen’s bill had forc 
reason into a new channel of comparison: he had begun to 
from a new point of view what wa necessari and unnecessari in 
order, and to see that there must be some chang of habit. how 
such a chang be made without rosamond’s concurr? the 
occas of open the disagre fact to her wa forc upon him.

have no monei, and have privat sought advic as to what 
could possibl be given by a man in hi posit, lydgat had 
the on good secur in hi power to the less peremptori creditor, 
wa a silversmith and jewel, and who consent to take on 
the upholster’s credit also, accept interest for a given term. 
secur necessari wa a bill of sale on the furnitur of hi hous,
which might make a creditor easi for a reason time about a 
amount to less than four hundr pound; and the silversmith, mr.
dover, wa will to reduc it by take back a portion of the 
and ani other articl which wa as good as new. “ani other articl” 
a phrase delic impli jewelleri, and more particularli 
purpl amethyst cost thirti pound, which lydgat had bought as 
bridal present.

opinion mai be divid as to hi wisdom in make thi present: 
mai think that it wa a grace attent to be expect from a 
like lydgat, and that the fault of ani troublesom consequ lai 
the pinch narrow of provinci life at that time, which 
no conveni for profession peopl whose fortun wa 
proport to their tast; also, in lydgat’s 
fastidi about ask hi friend for monei.

howev, it had seem a question of no moment to him on that 
morn when he went to give a final order for plate: in the 
of other jewel enorm expens, and as an addit to order 
which the amount had not been exactli calcul, thirti pound 
ornament so exquisit suit to rosamond’s neck and arm 
hardli appear excess when there wa no readi cash for it to exce.
but at thi crisi lydgat’s imagin could not help dwell on 
possibl of let the amethyst take their place again among mr.
dover’s stock, though he shrank from the idea of propos thi 
rosamond. have been rous to discern consequ which he had 
been in the habit of trace, he wa prepar to act on 
discern with some of the rigor (by no mean all) that he would 
appli in pursu experi. he wa nerv himself to thi rigor 
he rode from brass, and medit on the represent he 
make to rosamond.

it wa even when he got home. he wa intens miser, 
strong man of nine-and-twenti and of mani gift. he wa not 
angrili within himself that he had made a profound mistak; but 
mistak wa at work in him like a recogn chronic diseas, 
it uneasi importun with everi prospect, and enfeebl 
thought. as he went along the passag to the draw-room, he heard 
piano and sing. of cours, ladislaw wa there. it wa some 
sinc will had part from dorothea, yet he wa still at the old 
in middlemarch. lydgat had no object in gener to ladislaw’
come, but just now he wa annoi that he could not find hi 
free. when he open the door the two singer went on toward 
kei-note, rais their ey and look at him inde, but 
regard hi entranc as an interrupt. to a man gall with 
har as poor lydgat wa, it is not sooth to see two 
warbl at him, as he come in with the sens that the pain dai 
still pain in store. hi face, alreadi paler than usual, took on 
scowl as he walk across the room and flung himself into a chair.

the singer feel themselv excus by the fact that thei had 
three bar to sing, now turn round.

“how ar you, lydgat?” said will, come forward to shake hand.

lydgat took hi hand, but did not think it necessari to speak.

“have you dine, tertiu? i expect you much earlier,” said rosamond,
who had alreadi seen that her husband wa in a “horribl humor.” 
seat herself in her usual place as she spoke.

“i have dine. i should like some tea, pleas,” said lydgat, curtli,
still scowl and look markedli at hi leg stretch out 
him.

will wa too quick to need more. “i shall be off,” he said, 
hi hat.

“tea is come,” said rosamond; “prai don’t go.”

“ye, lydgat is bore,” said will, who had more comprehens 
lydgat than rosamond had, and wa not offend by hi manner, 
imagin outdoor caus of annoy.

“there is the more need for you to stai,” said rosamond, playfulli, 
in her lightest accent; “he will not speak to me all the even.”

“ye, rosamond, i shall,” said lydgat, in hi strong bariton. “i 
some seriou busi to speak to you about.”

no introduct of the busi could have been less like that 
lydgat had intend; but her indiffer manner had been 
provok.

“there! you see,” said will. “i’m go to the meet about 
mechan’ institut. good-by;” and he went quickli out of the room.

rosamond did not look at her husband, but present rose and took 
place befor the tea-trai. she wa think that she had never seen 
so disagre. lydgat turn hi dark ey on her and watch her 
she delic handl the tea-servic with her taper finger, 
look at the object immedi befor her with no curv in her 
disturb, and yet with an ineff protest in her air against 
peopl with unpleas manner. for the moment he lost the sens of 
wound in a sudden specul about thi new form of 
impass reveal itself in the sylph-like frame which he 
onc interpret as the sign of a readi intellig sensit. 
mind glanc back to laur while he look at rosamond, he 
inwardli, “would _she_ kill me becaus i weari her?” and then, “it 
the wai with all women.” but thi power of gener which give 
so much the superior in mistak over the dumb anim, 
immedi thwart by lydgat’s memori of wonder impress 
the behavior of anoth woman—from dorothea’s look and tone 
emot about her husband when lydgat began to attend him—from 
passion cry to be taught what would best comfort that man for 
sake it seem as if she must quell everi impuls in her except 
yearn of faith and compass. these reviv 
succeed each other quickli and dreamili in lydgat’s mind while 
tea wa be brew. he had shut hi ey in the last instant 
reveri while he heard dorothea sai, “advis me—think what i 
do—he ha been all hi life labor and look forward. he 
about noth els—and i mind about noth els.”

that voic of deep-soul womanhood had remain within him as 
enkindl concept of dead and sceptr geniu had remain 
him (is there not a geniu for feel nobli which also reign 
human spirit and their conclus?); the tone were a music 
which he wa fall awai—he had realli fallen into a momentari doze,
when rosamond said in her silveri neutral wai, “here is your tea,
tertiu,” set it on the small tabl by hi side, and then 
back to her place without look at him. lydgat wa too hasti 
attribut insens to her; after her own fashion, she 
sensit enough, and took last impress. her impress now 
on of offenc and repuls. but then, rosamond had no scowl and 
never rais her voic: she wa quit sure that no on could 
find fault with her.

perhap lydgat and she had never felt so far off each other befor;
but there were strong reason for not defer hi revel, even 
he had not alreadi begun it by that abrupt announc; inde some 
the angri desir to rous her into more sensibl on hi 
which had prompt him to speak prematur, still mingl with 
pain in the prospect of her pain. but he wait till the trai wa gone,
the candl were lit, and the even quiet might be count on: 
interv had left time for repel tender to return into the 
cours. he spoke kindli.

“dear rosi, lai down your work and come to sit by me,” he said, gentli,
push awai the tabl, and stretch out hi arm to draw a chair 
hi own.

rosamond obei. as she came toward him in her draperi of 
faintli tint muslin, her slim yet round figur never look 
grace; as she sat down by him and laid on hand on the elbow of 
chair, at last look at him and meet hi ey, her delic 
and cheek and pure cut lip never had more of that untarnish 
which touch as in spring-time and infanc and all sweet fresh. 
touch lydgat now, and mingl the earli moment of hi love for 
with all the other memori which were stir in thi crisi of 
troubl. he laid hi ampl hand softli on her, sai—

“dear!” with the linger utter which affect give to the word.
rosamond too wa still under the power of that same past, and 
husband wa still in part the lydgat whose approv had 
delight. she put hi hair lightli awai from hi forehead, then laid 
other hand on hi, and wa consciou of forgiv him.

“i am oblig to tell you what will hurt you, rosi. but there 
thing which husband and wife must think of togeth. i dare sai it 
occur to you alreadi that i am short of monei.”

lydgat paus; but rosamond turn her neck and look at a vase 
the mantel-piec.

“i wa not abl to pai for all the thing we had to get befor we 
marri, and there have been expens sinc which i have been 
to meet. the consequ is, there is a larg debt at brass—
hundr and eighti pound—which ha been press on me a good while,
and in fact we ar get deeper everi dai, for peopl don’t pai 
the faster becaus other want the monei. i took pain to keep it 
you while you were not well; but now we must think togeth about it,
and you must help me.”

“what can _i_ do, tertiu?” said rosamond, turn her ey on 
again. that littl speech of four word, like so mani other in 
languag, is capabl by vari vocal inflect of express 
state of mind from helpless dim to exhaust 
percept, from the completest self-devot fellowship to the 
neutral aloof. rosamond’s thin utter threw into the word “
can—i—do!” as much neutral as thei could hold. thei fell like 
mortal chill on lydgat’s rous tender. he did not storm 
indign—he felt too sad a sink of the heart. and when he 
again it wa more in the tone of a man who forc himself to fulfil 
task.

“it is necessari for you to know, becaus i have to give secur for 
time, and a man must come to make an inventori of the furnitur.”

rosamond color deepli. “have you not ask papa for monei?” she said,
as soon as she could speak.

“no.”

“then i must ask him!” she said, releas her hand from lydgat’s,
and rise to stand at two yard’ distanc from him.

“no, rosi,” said lydgat, decis. “it is too late to do that. 
inventori will be begun to-morrow. rememb it is a mere secur: 
will make no differ: it is a temporari affair. i insist upon 
that your father shall not know, unless i choos to tell him,” 
lydgat, with a more peremptori emphasi.

thi certainli wa unkind, but rosamond had thrown him back on 
expect as to what she would do in the wai of quiet 
disobedi. the unkind seem unpardon to her: she wa 
given to weep and dislik it, but now her chin and lip began 
trembl and the tear well up. perhap it wa not possibl 
lydgat, under the doubl stress of outward materi difficulti and 
hi own proud resist to humili consequ, to imagin 
what thi sudden trial wa to a young creatur who had known 
but indulg, and whose dream had all been of new indulg, 
exactli to her tast. but he did wish to spare her as much as he could,
and her tear cut him to the heart. he could not speak 
immedi; but rosamond did not go on sob: she tri to 
her agit and wipe awai her tear, continu to look befor 
at the mantel-piec.

“try not to griev, darl,” said lydgat, turn hi ey up 
her. that she had chosen to move awai from him in thi moment of 
troubl made everyth harder to sai, but he must absolut go on.
“we must brace ourselv to do what is necessari. it is i who have 
in fault: i ought to have seen that i could not afford to live in 
wai. but mani thing have told against me in my practic, and it 
just now ha eb to a low point. i mai recov it, but in the 
time we must pull up—we must chang our wai of live. we shall 
it. when i have given thi secur i shall have time to look about me;
and you ar so clever that if you turn your mind to manag you 
school me into care. i have been a thoughtless rascal 
squar price—but come, dear, sit down and forgiv me.”

lydgat wa bow hi neck under the yoke like a creatur who 
talon, but who had reason too, which often reduc us to meek.
when he had spoken the last word in an implor tone, 
return to the chair by hi side. hi self-blame gave her some 
that he would attend to her opinion, and she said—

“why can you not put off have the inventori made? you can send 
men awai to-morrow when thei come.”

“i shall not send them awai,” said lydgat, the peremptori 
again. wa it of ani us to explain?

“if we left middlemarch? there would of cours be a sale, and 
would do as well.”

“but we ar not go to leav middlemarch.”

“i am sure, tertiu, it would be much better to do so. why can we 
go to london? or near durham, where your famili is known?”

“we can go nowher without monei, rosamond.”

“your friend would not wish you to be without monei. and sure 
odiou tradesmen might be made to understand that, and to wait, if 
would make proper represent to them.”

“thi is idl rosamond,” said lydgat, angrili. “you must learn to 
my judgment on question you don’t understand. i have made 
arrang, and thei must be carri out. as to friend, i have 
expect whatev from them, and shall not ask them for anyth.”

rosamond sat perfectli still. the thought in her mind wa that if 
had known how lydgat would behav, she would never have marri him.

“we have no time to wast now on unnecessari word, dear,” 
lydgat, try to be gentl again. “there ar some detail that i 
to consid with you. dover sai he will take a good deal of the 
back again, and ani of the jewelleri we like. he realli behav 
well.”

“ar we to go without spoon and fork then?” said rosamond, whose 
lip seem to get thinner with the thin of her utter. she 
determin to make no further resist or suggest.

“oh no, dear!” said lydgat. “but look here,” he continu, draw 
paper from hi pocket and open it; “here is dover’s account. see, 
have mark a number of articl, which if we return them 
reduc the amount by thirti pound and more. i have not mark ani 
the jewelleri.” lydgat had realli felt thi point of the 
veri bitter to himself; but he had overcom the feel by 
argument. he could not propos to rosamond that she should return 
particular present of hi, but he had told himself that he wa bound 
put dover’s offer befor her, and her inward prompt might make 
affair easi.

“it is useless for me to look, tertiu,” said rosamond, calmli; “
will return what you pleas.” she would not turn her ey on the paper,
and lydgat, flush up to the root of hi hair, drew it back and 
it fall on hi knee. meanwhil rosamond quietli went out of the room,
leav lydgat helpless and wonder. wa she not come back? 
seem that she had no more identifi herself with him than if 
had been creatur of differ speci and oppos interest. 
toss hi head and thrust hi hand deep into hi pocket with a 
of vengeanc. there wa still scienc—there were still good object 
work for. he must give a tug still—all the stronger becaus 
satisfact were go.

but the door open and rosamond re-enter. she carri the 
box contain the amethyst, and a tini ornament basket 
contain other box, and lai them on the chair where she had 
sit, she said, with perfect proprieti in her air—

“thi is all the jewelleri you ever gave me. you can return what 
like of it, and of the plate also. you will not, of cours, expect 
to stai at home to-morrow. i shall go to papa’s.”

to mani women the look lydgat cast at her would have been 
terribl than on of anger: it had in it a despair accept of 
distanc she wa place between them.

“and when shall you come back again?” he said, with a bitter edg 
hi accent.

“oh, in the even. of cours i shall not mention the subject 
mamma.” rosamond wa convinc that no woman could behav 
irreproach than she wa behav; and she went to sit down at 
work-tabl. lydgat sat medit a minut or two, and the result 
that he said, with some of the old emot in hi tone—

“now we have been unit, rosi, you should not leav me to myself 
the first troubl that ha come.”

“certainli not,” said rosamond; “i shall do everyth it becom me 
do.”

“it is not right that the thing should be left to servant, or that 
should have to speak to them about it. and i shall be oblig to 
out—i don’t know how earli. i understand your shrink from 
humili of these monei affair. but, my dear rosamond, as 
question of pride, which i feel just as much as you can, it is 
better to manag the thing ourselv, and let the servant see 
littl of it as possibl; and sinc you ar my wife, there is 
hinder your share in my disgrac—if there were disgrac.”

rosamond did not answer immedi, but at last she said, “veri well,
i will stai at home.”

“i shall not touch these jewel, rosi. take them awai again. but i 
write out a list of plate that we mai return, and that can be pack 
and sent at onc.”

“the servant will know _that_,” said rosamond, with the 
touch of sarcasm.

“well, we must meet some disagre as necess. where is 
ink, i wonder?” said lydgat, rise, and throw the account on 
larger tabl where he meant to write.

rosamond went to reach the inkstand, and after set it on the 
wa go to turn awai, when lydgat, who wa stand close by, 
hi arm round her and drew her toward him, sai—

“come, darl, let us make the best of thing. it will onli be for 
time, i hope, that we shall have to be stingi and particular. kiss me.”

hi nativ warm-hearted took a great deal of quench, and it is 
part of manli for a husband to feel keenli the fact that 
inexperienc girl ha got into troubl by marri him. she 
hi kiss and return it faintli, and in thi wai an appear 
accord wa recov for the time. but lydgat could not help 
forward with dread to the inevit futur discuss 
expenditur and the necess for a complet chang in their wai 
live.




chapter lix.

“thei said of old the soul had human shape,
but smaller, subtler than the fleshli self,
so wander forth for air when it pleas.
and see! besid her cherub-face there 
a pale-lip form aerial 
it prompt in that littl shell her ear.”


new is often dispers as thoughtlessli and effect as that 
which the bee carri off (have no idea how powderi thei ar) 
thei ar buzz in search of their particular nectar. thi 
comparison ha refer to fred vinci, who on that even at 
parsonag heard a live discuss among the ladi on the new 
their old servant had got from tantripp concern mr. casaubon’
strang mention of mr. ladislaw in a codicil to hi will made not 
befor hi death. miss winifr wa astound to find that her 
had known the fact befor, and observ that camden wa the 
wonder man for know thing and not tell them; whereupon 
garth said that the codicil had perhap got mix up with the habit 
spider, which miss winifr never would listen to. mr. 
consid that the new had someth to do with their have 
onc seen mr. ladislaw at lowick, and miss nobl made mani 
compassion mew.

fred knew littl and care less about ladislaw and the casaubon, 
hi mind never recur to that discuss till on dai call 
rosamond at hi mother’s request to deliv a messag as he pass, 
happen to see ladislaw go awai. fred and rosamond had littl 
sai to each other now that marriag had remov her from collis 
the unpleas of brother, and especi now that he had 
what she held the stupid and even reprehens step of give up 
church to take to such a busi as mr. garth’s. henc fred talk 
prefer of what he consid indiffer new, and “a propo 
that young ladislaw” mention what he had heard at lowick parsonag.

now lydgat, like mr. farebroth, knew a great deal more than he told,
and when he had onc been set think about the relat between 
and dorothea hi conjectur had gone beyond the fact. he imagin 
there wa a passion attach on both side, and thi struck him 
much too seriou to gossip about. he rememb will’s 
when he had mention mr. casaubon, and wa the more circumspect. 
the whole hi surmis, in addit to what he knew of the fact,
increas hi friendli and toler toward ladislaw, and made 
understand the vacil which kept him at middlemarch after he 
said that he should go awai. it wa signific of the 
between lydgat’s mind and rosamond’s that he had no impuls to 
to her on the subject; inde, he did not quit trust her 
toward will. and he wa right there; though he had no vision of 
wai in which her mind would act in urg her to speak.

when she repeat fred’s new to lydgat, he said, “take care you don’
drop the faintest hint to ladislaw, rosi. he is like to fly out as 
you insult him. of cours it is a pain affair.”

rosamond turn her neck and pat her hair, look the imag 
placid indiffer. but the next time will came when lydgat wa awai,
she spoke archli about hi not go to london as he had threaten.

“i know all about it. i have a confidenti littl bird,” said she,
show veri pretti air of her head over the bit of work held 
between her activ finger. “there is a power magnet in 
neighborhood.”

“to be sure there is. nobodi know that better than you,” said will,
with light gallantri, but inwardli prepar to be angri.

“it is realli the most charm romanc: mr. casaubon jealou, 
forese that there wa no on els whom mr. casaubon would so 
like to marri, and no on who would so much like to marri her as 
certain gentleman; and then lai a plan to spoil all by make 
forfeit her properti if she did marri that gentleman—and then—
then—and then—oh, i have no doubt the end will be thoroughli romant.”

“great god! what do you mean?” said will, flush over face and ear,
hi featur seem to chang as if he had had a violent shake. “don’
joke; tell me what you mean.”

“you don’t realli know?” said rosamond, no longer play, and 
noth better than to tell in order that she might evok effect.

“no!” he return, impati.

“don’t know that mr. casaubon ha left it in hi will that if mr.
casaubon marri you she is to forfeit all her properti?”

“how do you know that it is true?” said will, eagerli.

“my brother fred heard it from the farebroth.” will start up 
hi chair and reach hi hat.

“i dare sai she like you better than the properti,” said rosamond,
look at him from a distanc.

“prai don’t sai ani more about it,” said will, in a hoars 
extrem unlik hi usual light voic. “it is a foul insult to her 
to me.” then he sat down absent, look befor him, but 
noth.

“now you ar angri with _me_,” said rosamond. “it is too bad to 
_me_ malic. you ought to be oblig to me for tell you.”

“so i am,” said will, abruptli, speak with that kind of doubl 
which belong to dreamer who answer question.

“i expect to hear of the marriag,” said rosamond, playfulli.

“never! you will never hear of the marriag!”

with those word utter impetu, will rose, put out hi hand 
rosamond, still with the air of a somnambulist, and went awai.

when he wa gone, rosamond left her chair and walk to the other 
of the room, lean when she got there against a chiffonnier, 
look out of the window wearili. she wa oppress by ennui, and 
that dissatisfact which in women’s mind is continu turn 
a trivial jealousi, refer to no real claim, spring from 
deeper passion than the vagu exacting of egoism, and yet 
of impel action as well as speech. “there realli is noth to 
for much,” said poor rosamond inwardli, think of the famili 
quallingham, who did not write to her; and that perhap tertiu when 
came home would teas her about expens. she had alreadi 
disobei him by ask her father to help them, and he had 
decis by sai, “i am more like to want help myself.”




chapter lx.

good phrase ar sure, and ever were, veri commend.
—_justic shallow_.


a few dai afterward—it wa alreadi the end of august—there wa 
occas which caus some excit in middlemarch: the public, if 
chose, wa to have the advantag of bui, under the 
auspic of mr. borthrop trumbul, the furnitur, book, and 
which anybodi might see by the handbil to be the best in everi kind,
belong to edwin larcher, esq. thi wa not on of the 
indic the depress of trade; on the contrari, it wa due to mr.
larcher’s great success in the carri busi, which warrant 
purchas of a mansion near riverston alreadi furnish in high style 
an illustri spa physician—furnish inde with such larg 
of expens flesh-paint in the dine-room, that mr. larcher 
nervou until reassur by find the subject to be scriptur. 
the fine opportun to purchas which wa well point out in 
handbil of mr. borthrop trumbul, whose acquaint with the 
of art enabl him to state that the hall furnitur, to be sold 
reserv, compris a piec of carv by a contemporari of gibbon.

at middlemarch in those time a larg sale wa regard as a kind 
festiv. there wa a tabl spread with the best cold eatabl, as at 
superior funer; and facil were offer for 
gener-drink of cheer glass which might lead to gener 
cheer bid for undesir articl. mr. larcher’s sale wa 
more attract in the fine weather becaus the hous stood just at 
end of the town, with a garden and stabl attach, in that 
issu from middlemarch call the london road, which wa also the 
to the new hospit and to mr. bulstrod’s retir resid, known 
the shrub. in short, the auction wa as good as a fair, and drew 
class with leisur at command: to some, who risk make bid 
order simpli to rais price, it wa almost equal to bet at 
race. the second dai, when the best furnitur wa to be sold,
“everybodi” wa there; even mr. thesig, the rector of st. peter’s,
had look in for a short time, wish to bui the carv tabl, 
had rub elbow with mr. bambridg and mr. horrock. there wa 
wreath of middlemarch ladi accommod with seat round the 
tabl in the dine-room, where mr. borthrop trumbul wa mount 
desk and hammer; but the row chiefli of masculin face behind 
often vari by incom and outgo both from the door and 
larg bow-window open on to the lawn.

“everybodi” that dai did not includ mr. bulstrod, whose health 
not well endur crowd and draught. but mr. bulstrod 
particularli wish to have a certain pictur—a “supper at emmau,”
attribut in the catalogu to guido; and at the last moment befor 
dai of the sale mr. bulstrod had call at the offic of 
“pioneer,” of which he wa now on of the proprietor, to beg of mr.
ladislaw as a great favor that he would obligingli us hi 
knowledg of pictur on behalf of mr. bulstrod, and judg of 
valu of thi particular paint—“if,” ad the scrupul 
banker, “attend at the sale would not interfer with 
arrang for your departur, which i know is immin.”

thi proviso might have sound rather satir in will’s ear if 
had been in a mood to care about such satir. it refer to 
understand enter into mani week befor with the proprietor 
the paper, that he should be at liberti ani dai he pleas to hand 
the manag to the subeditor whom he had been train; sinc 
wish final to quit middlemarch. but indefinit vision of 
ar weak against the eas of do what is habitu or 
agreeabl; and we all know the difficulti of carri out a 
when we secretli long that it mai turn out to be unnecessari. in 
state of mind the most incredul person ha a privat 
toward miracl: imposs to conceiv how our wish could 
fulfil, still—veri wonder thing have happen! will did 
confess thi weak to himself, but he linger. what wa the us 
go to london at that time of the year? the rugbi men who 
rememb him were not there; and so far as polit write 
concern, he would rather for a few week go on with the “pioneer.” 
the present moment, howev, when mr. bulstrod wa speak to him, 
had both a strengthen resolv to go and an equal strong resolv 
to go till he had onc more seen dorothea. henc he repli that he 
reason for defer hi departur a littl, and would be happi to 
to the sale.

will wa in a defiant mood, hi conscious be deepli stung 
the thought that the peopl who look at him probabl knew a 
tantamount to an accus against him as a fellow with low 
which were to be frustrat by a dispos of properti. like most 
who assert their freedom with regard to convent distinct, 
wa prepar to be sudden and quick at quarrel with ani on who 
hint that he had person reason for that assert—that there 
anyth in hi blood, hi bear, or hi charact to which he 
the mask of an opinion. when he wa under an irrit impress 
thi kind he would go about for dai with a defiant look, the 
chang in hi transpar skin as if he were on the _qui vive_,
watch for someth which he had to dart upon.

thi express wa peculiarli notic in him at the sale, and 
who had onli seen him in hi mood of gentl odditi or of 
enjoy would have been struck with a contrast. he wa not sorri 
have thi occas for appear in public befor the 
tribe of toller, hackbutt, and the rest, who look down on him as 
adventur, and were in a state of brutal ignor about dant—
sneer at hi polish blood, and were themselv of a breed veri 
in need of cross. he stood in a conspicu place not far from 
auction, with a fore-finger in each side-pocket and hi head 
backward, not care to speak to anybodi, though he had been 
welcom as a connoiss_ur_ by mr. trumbul, who wa enjoi 
utmost activ of hi great faculti.

and sure among all men whose vocat requir them to exhibit 
power of speech, the happiest is a prosper provinci 
keenli aliv to hi own joke and sensibl of hi 
knowledg. some saturnin, sour-blood person might object to 
constantli insist on the merit of all articl from boot-jack 
“berghem;” but mr. borthrop trumbul had a kindli liquid in hi vein;
he wa an admir by natur, and would have like to have the 
under hi hammer, feel that it would go at a higher figur for 
recommend.

meanwhil mr. larcher’s draw-room furnitur wa enough for him.
when will ladislaw had come in, a second fender, said to have 
forgotten in it right place, suddenli claim the auction’
enthusiasm, which he distribut on the equit principl of 
those thing most which were most in need of prais. the fender wa 
polish steel, with much lancet-shape open-work and a sharp edg.

“now, ladi,” said he, “i shall appeal to you. here is a fender 
at ani other sale would hardli be offer with out reserv, be, as 
mai sai, for qualiti of steel and quaint of design, a kind 
thing”—here mr. trumbul drop hi voic and becam slightli nasal,
trim hi outlin with hi left finger—“that might not fall in 
ordinari tast. allow me to tell you that by-and-by thi style 
workmanship will be the onli on in vogu—half-a-crown, you said? 
you—go at half-a-crown, thi characterist fender; and i 
particular inform that the antiqu style is veri much sought 
in high quarter. three shill—three-and-sixpenc—hold it well up,
joseph! look, ladi, at the chastiti of the design—i have no 
myself that it wa turn out in the last centuri! four shill, mr.
mawmsei?—four shill.”

“it’s not a thing i would put in _my_ draw-room,” said mr. mawmsei,
audibl, for the warn of the rash husband. “i wonder _at_ mr.
larcher. everi bless child’s head that fell against it would be 
in two. the edg is like a knife.”

“quit true,” rejoin mr. trumbul, quickli, “and most 
us to have a fender at hand that will cut, if you have a 
shoe-tie or a bit of string that want cut and no knife at hand:
mani a man ha been left hang becaus there wa no knife to cut 
down. gentlemen, here’s a fender that if you had the misfortun to 
yourselv would cut you down in no time—with 
celer—four-and-sixpenc—five—five-and-sixpenc—an appropri 
for a spare bedroom where there wa a four-poster and a guest a 
out of hi mind—six shill—thank you, mr. clintup—go at 
shill—go—gone!” the auction’s glanc, which had 
search round him with a preternatur suscept to all sign 
bid, here drop on the paper befor him, and hi voic 
drop into a tone of indiffer despatch as he said, “mr. clintup.
be handi, joseph.”

“it wa worth six shill to have a fender you could alwai tell 
joke on,” said mr. clintup, laugh low and apologet to hi 
neighbor. he wa a diffid though distinguish nurseryman, 
fear that the audienc might regard hi bid as a foolish on.

meanwhil joseph had brought a tray of small articl. “now,
ladi,” said mr. trumbul, take up on of the articl, “thi 
contain a veri recherchi lot—a collect of trifl for 
draw-room tabl—and trifl make the sum _of_ human thing—
more import than trifl—(ye, mr. ladislaw, ye, by-and-by)—
pass the trai round, joseph—these bijoux must be examin, ladi. 
i have in my hand is an ingeni contriv—a sort of 
rebu, i mai call it: here, you see, it look like an 
heart-shape box, portabl—for the pocket; there, again, it 
like a splendid doubl flower—an ornament for the tabl; and now”—mr.
trumbul allow the flower to fall alarmingli into string 
heart-shape leav—“a book of riddl! no less than five 
print in a beauti red. gentlemen, if i had less of a conscienc, 
should not wish you to bid high for thi lot—i have a long for 
myself. what can promot innoc mirth, and i mai sai virtu, 
than a good riddl?—it hinder profan languag, and attach a man 
the societi of refin femal. thi ingeni articl itself, 
the eleg domino-box, card-basket, &c., ought alon to give a 
price to the lot. carri in the pocket it might make an 
welcom in ani societi. four shill, sir?—four shill for 
remark collect of riddl with the et caetera. here is 
sampl: ‘how must you spell honei to make it catch ladi-bird?
answer—monei.’ you hear?—ladi-bird—honei monei. thi is an 
to sharpen the intellect; it ha a sting—it ha what we call satir,
and wit without indec. four-and-sixpenc—five shill.”

the bid ran on with warm rivalri. mr. bowyer wa a bidder, 
thi wa too exasper. bowyer couldn’t afford it, and onli 
to hinder everi other man from make a figur. the current 
even mr. horrock with it, but thi committ of himself to an 
fell from him with so littl sacrific of hi neutral express, 
the bid might not have been detect as hi but for the friendli 
of mr. bambridg, who want to know what horrock would do with 
stuff onli fit for haberdash given over to that state of 
which the hors-dealer so cordial recogn in the major 
earthli exist. the lot wa final knock down at a guinea to mr.
spilkin, a young slender of the neighborhood, who wa reckless 
hi pocket-monei and felt hi want of memori for riddl.

“come, trumbul, thi is too bad—you’ve been put some old maid’
rubbish into the sale,” murmur mr. toller, get close to 
auction. “i want to see how the print go, and i must be off soon.”

“_im_mediat, mr. toller. it wa onli an act of benevol 
your nobl heart would approv. joseph! quick with the print—lot 235.
now, gentlemen, you who ar connoiss_ur_, you ar go to have 
treat. here is an engrav of the duke of wellington surround by 
staff on the field of waterloo; and notwithstand recent event 
have, as it were, envelop our great hero in a cloud, i will be 
to sai—for a man in my line must not be blown about by 
wind—that a finer subject—of the modern order, belong to our 
time and epoch—the understand of man could hardli conceiv: 
might, perhap, but not men, sir, not men.”

“who paint it?” said mr. powderel, much impress.

“it is a proof befor the letter, mr. powderel—the painter is 
known,” answer trumbul, with a certain gasping in hi 
word, after which he purs up hi lip and stare round him.

“i’ll bid a pound!” said mr. powderel, in a tone of resolv emot,
as of a man readi to put himself in the breach. whether from aw 
piti, nobodi rais the price on him.

next came two dutch print which mr. toller had been eager for, 
after he had secur them he went awai. other print, and 
some paint, were sold to lead middlemarch who had come with 
special desir for them, and there wa a more activ movement of 
audienc in and out; some, who had bought what thei want, go awai,
other come in either quit newli or from a temporari visit to 
refresh which were spread under the marque on the lawn. it 
thi marque that mr. bambridg wa bent on bui, and he appear 
like look insid it frequent, as a foretast of it possess. 
the last occas of hi return from it he wa observ to bring 
him a new companion, a stranger to mr. trumbul and everi on els,
whose appear, howev, led to the supposit that he might be 
rel of the hors-dealer’s—also “given to indulg.” hi 
whisker, impos swagger, and swing of the leg, made him a 
figur; but hi suit of black, rather shabbi at the edg, caus 
prejudici infer that he wa not abl to afford himself as 
indulg as he like.

“who is it you’ve pick up, bam?” said mr. horrock, asid.

“ask him yourself,” return mr. bambridg. “he said he’d just 
in from the road.”

mr. horrock ei the stranger, who wa lean back against hi 
with on hand, us hi toothpick with the other, and look 
him with a certain restless appar under the silenc impos 
him by circumst.

at length the “supper at emmau” wa brought forward, to will’s 
relief, for he wa get so tire of the proceed that he 
drawn back a littl and lean hi shoulder against the wall 
behind the auction. he now came forward again, and hi ey 
the conspicu stranger, who, rather to hi surpris, wa stare 
him markedli. but will wa immedi appeal to by mr. trumbul.

“ye, mr. ladislaw, ye; thi interest you as a connoiss_ur_, 
think. it is some pleasur,” the auction went on with a 
fervor, “to have a pictur like thi to show to a compani of ladi 
gentlemen—a pictur worth ani sum to an individu whose mean were 
a level with hi judgment. it is a paint of the italian school—
the celebr _guydo_, the greatest painter in the world, the chief 
the old master, as thei ar call—i take it, becaus thei were up 
a thing or two beyond most of us—in possess of secret now lost 
the bulk of mankind. let me tell you, gentlemen, i have seen a 
mani pictur by the old master, and thei ar not all up to 
mark—some of them ar darker than you might like and not 
subject. but here is a _guydo_—the frame alon is worth pound—
ani ladi might be proud to hang up—a suitabl thing for what we call 
refectori in a charit institut, if ani gentleman of 
corpor wish to show hi munifi_cenc_. turn it a littl, sir?
ye. joseph, turn it a littl toward mr. ladislaw—mr. ladislaw, 
been abroad, understand the merit of these thing, you observ.”

all ey were for a moment turn toward will, who said, coolli, “
pound.” the auction burst out in deep remonstr.

“ah! mr. ladislaw! the frame alon is worth that. ladi and gentlemen,
for the credit of the town! suppos it should be discov 
that a gem of art ha been amongst us in thi town, and nobodi 
middlemarch awak to it. five guinea—five seven-six—five ten. still,
ladi, still! it is a gem, and ‘full mani a gem,’ as the poet sai,
ha been allow to go at a nomin price becaus the public knew 
better, becaus it wa offer in circl where there wa—i wa 
to sai a low feel, but no!—six pound—six guinea—a _guydo_ of 
first order go at six guinea—it is an insult to religion, ladi;
it touch us all as christian, gentlemen, that a subject like 
should go at such a low figur—six pound ten—seven—”

the bid wa brisk, and will continu to share in it, 
that mr. bulstrod had a strong wish for the pictur, and 
that he might stretch the price to twelv pound. but it wa 
down to him at ten guinea, whereupon he push hi wai toward 
bow-window and went out. he chose to go under the marque to get 
glass of water, be hot and thirsti: it wa empti of other visitor,
and he ask the woman in attend to fetch him some fresh water; 
befor she wa well gone he wa annoi to see enter the 
stranger who had stare at him. it struck will at thi moment that 
man might be on of those polit parasit insect of the 
kind who had onc or twice claim acquaint with him as 
heard him speak on the reform question, and who might think of 
a shill by new. in thi light hi person, alreadi rather heat 
behold on a summer’s dai, appear the more disagre; and will,
half-seat on the elbow of a garden-chair, turn hi ey 
awai from the comer. but thi signifi littl to our acquaint mr.
raffl, who never hesit to thrust himself on 
observ, if it suit hi purpos to do so. he move a step or 
till he wa in front of will, and said with full-mouth hast, “
me, mr. ladislaw—wa your mother’s name sarah dunkirk?”

will, start to hi feet, move backward a step, frown, and 
with some fierc, “ye, sir, it wa. and what is that to you?”

it wa in will’s natur that the first spark it threw out wa a 
answer of the question and a challeng of the consequ. to 
said, “what is that to you?” in the first instanc, would have 
like shuffl—as if he mind who knew anyth about hi origin!

raffl on hi side had not the same eager for a collis 
wa impli in ladislaw’s threaten air. the slim young fellow 
hi girl’s complexion look like a tiger-cat readi to spring on him.
under such circumst mr. raffl’s pleasur in annoi hi 
wa kept in abey.

“no offenc, my good sir, no offenc! i onli rememb your mother—
her when she wa a girl. but it is your father that you featur, sir. 
had the pleasur of see your father too. parent aliv, mr.
ladislaw?”

“no!” thunder will, in the same attitud as befor.

“should be glad to do you a servic, mr. ladislaw—by jove, i should!
hope to meet again.”

hereupon raffl, who had lift hi hat with the last word, 
himself round with a swing of hi leg and walk awai. will 
after him a moment, and could see that he did not re-enter 
auction-room, but appear to be walk toward the road. for 
instant he thought that he had been foolish not to let the man go 
talk;—but no! on the whole he prefer do without knowledg 
that sourc.

later in the even, howev, raffl overtook him in the street, 
appear either to have forgotten the rough of hi 
recept or to intend aveng it by a forgiv familiar, 
him jovial and walk by hi side, remark at first on 
pleasant of the town and neighborhood. will suspect that the 
had been drink and wa consid how to shake him off when 
said—

“i’ve been abroad myself, mr. ladislaw—i’ve seen the world—us 
parlei-vou a littl. it wa at boulogn i saw your father—a 
uncommon like you ar of him, by jove! mouth—nose—ey—hair 
off your brow just like hi—a littl in the foreign style. john 
doesn’t do much of that. but your father wa veri ill when i saw him.
lord, lord! hand you might see through. you were a small 
then. did he get well?”

“no,” said will, curtli.

“ah! well! i’ve often wonder what becam of your mother. she ran 
from her friend when she wa a young lass—a proud-spirit lass, 
pretti, by jove! i knew the reason why she ran awai,” said raffl,
wink slowli as he look sidewai at will.

“you know noth dishonor of her, sir,” said will, turn on 
rather savag. but mr. raffl just now wa not sensit to 
of manner.

“not a bit!” said he, toss hi head decis. “she wa a 
too honor to like her friend—that wa it!” here raffl 
wink slowli. “lord bless you, i knew all about ’em—a littl in 
you mai call the respect thiev line—the high style 
receiv-hous—none of your hole and corner—first-rate. slap-
shop, high profit and no mistak. but lord! sarah would have 
noth about it—a dash young ladi she wa—fine board-school—
for a lord’s wife—onli archi duncan threw it at her out of spite,
becaus she would have noth to do with him. and so she ran awai 
the whole concern. i travel for ’em, sir, in a gentlemanli wai—at 
high salari. thei didn’t mind her run awai at first—godli folk,
sir, veri godli—and she wa for the stage. the son wa aliv then, 
the daughter wa at a discount. hallo! here we ar at the blue bull.
what do you sai, mr. ladislaw?—shall we turn in and have a glass?”

“no, i must sai good even,” said will, dash up a passag 
led into lowick gate, and almost run to get out of raffl’s reach.

he walk a long while on the lowick road awai from the town, glad 
the starlit dark when it came. he felt as if he had had dirt 
on him amidst shout of scorn. there wa thi to confirm the fellow’
statement—that hi mother never would tell him the reason why she 
run awai from her famili.

well! what wa he, will ladislaw, the wors, suppos the truth 
that famili to be the ugliest? hi mother had brave hardship in 
to separ herself from it. but if dorothea’s friend had known 
stori—if the chettam had known it—thei would have had a fine color 
give their suspicion a welcom ground for think him unfit to 
near her. howev, let them suspect what thei pleas, thei would 
themselv in the wrong. thei would find out that the blood in 
vein wa as free from the taint of mean as their.




chapter lxi.

“inconsist,” answer imlac, “cannot both be right, but 
to man thei mai both be true.”—_rassela_.


the same night, when mr. bulstrod return from a journei to 
on busi, hi good wife met him in the entranc-hall and drew 
into hi privat sit-room.

“nichola,” she said, fix her honest ey upon him anxious, “
ha been such a disagre man here ask for you—it ha made 
quit uncomfort.”

“what kind of man, my dear,” said mr. bulstrod, dreadfulli certain 
the answer.

“a red-face man with larg whisker, and most impud in hi manner.
he declar he wa an old friend of your, and said you would be 
not to see him. he want to wait for you here, but i told him he 
see you at the bank to-morrow morn. most impud he wa!—stare 
me, and said hi friend nick had luck in wive. i don’t believ 
would have gone awai, if blucher had not happen to break hi 
and come run round on the gravel—for i wa in the garden; so 
said, ‘you’d better go awai—the dog is veri fierc, and i can’t 
him.’ do you realli know anyth of such a man?”

“i believ i know who he is, my dear,” said mr. bulstrod, in hi 
subdu voic, “an unfortun dissolut wretch, whom i help too 
in dai gone by. howev, i presum you will not be troubl by 
again. he will probabl come to the bank—to beg, doubtless.”

no more wa said on the subject until the next dai, when mr. 
had return from the town and wa dress for dinner. hi wife, 
sure that he wa come home, look into hi dress-room and saw 
with hi coat and cravat off, lean on arm on a chest of drawer 
stare absent at the ground. he start nervous and look up 
she enter.

“you look veri ill, nichola. is there anyth the matter?”

“i have a good deal of pain in my head,” said mr. bulstrod, who wa 
frequent ail that hi wife wa alwai readi to believ in 
caus of depress.

“sit down and let me spong it with vinegar.”

physic mr. bulstrod did not want the vinegar, but moral 
affection attent sooth him. though alwai polit, it wa 
habit to receiv such servic with marit cool, as hi wife’
duti. but to-dai, while she wa bend over him, he said, “you 
veri good, harriet,” in a tone which had someth new in it to 
ear; she did not know exactli what the novelti wa, but her woman’
solicitud shape itself into a dart thought that he might be 
to have an ill.

“ha anyth worri you?” she said. “did that man come to you at 
bank?”

“ye; it wa as i had suppos. he is a man who at on time might 
done better. but he ha sunk into a drunken debauch creatur.”

“is he quit gone awai?” said mr. bulstrod, anxious; but 
certain reason she refrain from ad, “it wa veri disagre 
hear him call himself a friend of your.” at that moment she 
not have like to sai anyth which impli her habitu 
that her husband’s earlier connect were not quit on a level 
her own. not that she knew much about them. that her husband had 
first been emploi in a bank, that he had afterward enter into 
he call citi busi and gain a fortun befor he 
three-and-thirti, that he had marri a widow who wa much older 
himself—a dissent, and in other wai probabl of that 
qualiti usual percept in a first wife if inquir into with 
dispassion judgment of a second—wa almost as much as she had 
to learn beyond the glimps which mr. bulstrod’s 
occasion gave of hi earli bent toward religion, hi 
to be a preacher, and hi associ with missionari and 
effort. she believ in him as an excel man whose pieti carri 
peculiar emin in belong to a layman, whose influenc had 
her own mind toward serious, and whose share of perish good 
been the mean of rais her own posit. but she also like to 
that it wa well in everi sens for mr. bulstrod to have won the 
of harriet vinci; whose famili wa undeni in a middlemarch light—
better light sure than ani thrown in london thoroughfar 
dissent chapel-yard. the unreform provinci mind 
london; and while true religion wa everywher save, honest mr.
bulstrod wa convinc that to be save in the church wa 
respect. she so much wish to ignor toward other that 
husband had ever been a london dissent, that she like to keep it 
of sight even in talk to him. he wa quit awar of thi; inde 
some respect he wa rather afraid of thi ingenu wife, 
imit pieti and nativ worldli were equal sincer, who 
noth to be asham of, and whom he had marri out of a 
inclin still subsist. but hi fear were such as belong to 
man who care to maintain hi recogn supremaci: the loss of 
consider from hi wife, as from everi on els who did not 
hate him out of enmiti to the truth, would be as the begin of 
to him. when she said—

“is he quit gone awai?”

“oh, i trust so,” he answer, with an effort to throw as much 
unconcern into hi tone as possibl!

but in truth mr. bulstrod wa veri far from a state of quiet trust. 
the interview at the bank, raffl had made it evid that 
eager to torment wa almost as strong in him as ani other greed. 
had frankli said that he had turn out of the wai to come 
middlemarch, just to look about him and see whether the 
would suit him to live in. he had certainli had a few debt to pai 
than he expect, but the two hundr pound were not gone yet: a 
five-and-twenti would suffic him to go awai with for the present. 
he had want chiefli wa to see hi friend nick and famili, and 
all about the prosper of a man to whom he wa so much attach.
by-and-by he might come back for a longer stai. thi time 
declin to be “seen off the premis,” as he express it—declin 
quit middlemarch under bulstrod’s ey. he meant to go by coach 
next dai—if he chose.

bulstrod felt himself helpless. neither threat nor coax 
avail: he could not count on ani persist fear nor on ani promis. 
the contrari, he felt a cold certainti at hi heart that raffl—
provid sent death to hinder him—would come back to 
befor long. and that certainti wa a terror.

it wa not that he wa in danger of legal punish or of beggari: 
wa in danger onli of see disclos to the judgment of hi 
and the mourn percept of hi wife certain fact of hi past 
which would render him an object of scorn and an opprobrium of 
religion with which he had dilig associ himself. the terror 
be judg sharpen the memori: it send an inevit glare 
that long-unvisit past which ha been habitu recal onli 
gener phrase. even without memori, the life is bound into on by 
zone of depend in growth and decai; but intens memori forc a 
to own hi blameworthi past. with memori set smart like a 
wound, a man’s past is not simpli a dead histori, an 
prepar of the present: it is not a repent error shaken 
from the life: it is a still quiver part of himself, 
shudder and bitter flavor and the tingl of a merit shame.

into thi second life bulstrod’s past had now risen, onli 
pleasur of it seem to have lost their qualiti. night and dai,
without interrupt save of brief sleep which onli wove retrospect 
fear into a fantast present, he felt the scene of hi earlier 
come between him and everyth els, as obstin as when we 
through the window from a light room, the object we turn our 
on ar still befor us, instead of the grass and the tree. 
success event inward and outward were there in on view: 
each might be dwelt on in turn, the rest still kept their hold in 
conscious.

onc more he saw himself the young banker’s clerk, with an 
person, as clever in figur as he wa fluent in speech and fond 
theolog definit: an emin though young member of a 
dissent church at highburi, have had strike experi 
convict of sin and sens of pardon. again he heard himself 
for as brother bulstrod in prayer meet, speak on 
platform, preach in privat hous. again he felt himself 
of the ministri as possibl hi vocat, and inclin 
missionari labor. that wa the happiest time of hi life: that wa 
spot he would have chosen now to awak in and find the rest a dream.
the peopl among whom brother bulstrod wa distinguish were 
few, but thei were veri near to him, and stir hi satisfact 
more; hi power stretch through a narrow space, but he felt 
effect the more intens. he believ without effort in the 
work of grace within him, and in the sign that god intend him 
special instrument.

then came the moment of transit; it wa with the sens of 
he had when he, an orphan educ at a commerci chariti-school, 
invit to a fine villa belong to mr. dunkirk, the richest man 
the congreg. soon he becam an intim there, honor for 
pieti by the wife, mark out for hi abil by the husband, 
wealth wa due to a flourish citi and west-end trade. that wa 
set-in of a new current for hi ambit, direct hi 
of “instrument” toward the unit of distinguish 
gift with success busi.

by-and-by came a decid extern lead: a confidenti 
partner di, and nobodi seem to the princip so well fit to 
the sever felt vacanc as hi young friend bulstrod, if he 
becom confidenti account. the offer wa accept. the 
wa a pawnbrok’s, of the most magnific sort both in extent 
profit; and on a short acquaint with it bulstrod becam 
that on sourc of magnific profit wa the easi recept of 
good offer, without strict inquiri as to where thei came from. 
there wa a branch hous at the west end, and no petti or 
to give suggest of shame.

he rememb hi first moment of shrink. thei were privat, 
were fill with argument; some of these take the form of prayer.
the busi wa establish and had old root; is it not on thing 
set up a new gin-palac and anoth to accept an invest in an 
on? the profit made out of lost soul—where can the line be drawn 
which thei begin in human transact? wa it not even god’s wai 
save hi chosen? “thou knowest,”—the young bulstrod had said then,
as the older bulstrod wa sai now—“thou knowest how loos my 
sit from these thing—how i view them all as implement for 
thy garden rescu here and there from the wilder.”

metaphor and preced were not want; peculiar 
experi were not want which at last made the retent of 
posit seem a servic demand of him: the vista of a fortun 
alreadi open itself, and bulstrod’s shrink remain privat. mr.
dunkirk had never expect that there would be ani shrink at all: 
had never conceiv that trade had anyth to do with the scheme 
salvat. and it wa true that bulstrod found himself carri on 
distinct live; hi religi activ could not be incompat 
hi busi as soon as he had argu himself into not feel 
incompat.

mental surround with that past again, bulstrod had the 
plea—inde, the year had been perpetu spin them 
intric thick, like mass of spider-web, pad the 
sensibl; nai, as ag made egoism more eager but less enjoi, 
soul had becom more satur with the belief that he did 
for god’s sake, be indiffer to it for hi own. and yet—if 
could be back in that far-off spot with hi youth poverti—why, 
he would choos to be a missionari.

but the train of caus in which he had lock himself went on. 
wa troubl in the fine villa at highburi. year befor, the 
daughter had run awai, defi her parent, and gone on the stage; 
now the onli boi di, and after a short time mr. dunkirk di also.
the wife, a simpl piou woman, left with all the wealth in and out 
the magnific trade, of which she never knew the precis natur, 
come to believ in bulstrod, and innoc ador him as women 
ador their priest or “man-made” minist. it wa natur that after 
time marriag should have been thought of between them. but mr.
dunkirk had qualm and yearn about her daughter, who had long 
regard as lost both to god and her parent. it wa known that 
daughter had marri, but she wa utterli gone out of sight. 
mother, have lost her boi, imagin a grandson, and wish in 
doubl sens to reclaim her daughter. if she were found, there would 
a channel for properti—perhap a wide on—in the provis for 
grandchildren. effort to find her must be made befor mr. 
would marri again. bulstrod concur; but after advertis as 
as other mode of inquiri had been tri, the mother believ that 
daughter wa not to be found, and consent to marri 
reserv of properti.

the daughter had been found; but onli on man besid bulstrod 
it, and he wa paid for keep silenc and carri himself awai.

that wa the bare fact which bulstrod wa now forc to see in 
rigid outlin with which act present themselv to onlook. but 
himself at that distant time, and even now in burn memori, the 
wa broken into littl sequenc, each justifi as it came 
reason which seem to prove it righteou. bulstrod’s cours up 
that time had, he thought, been sanction by remark provid,
appear to point the wai for him to be the agent in make the 
us of a larg properti and withdraw it from pervers. death 
other strike disposit, such as feminin trust, had come;
and bulstrod would have adopt cromwel’s word—“do you call 
bare event? the lord piti you!” the event were compar small,
but the essenti condit wa there—name, that thei were in 
of hi own end. it wa easi for him to settl what wa due from him 
other by inquir what were god’s intent with regard to himself.
could it be for god’s servic that thi fortun should in 
consider proport go to a young woman and her husband who 
given up to the lightest pursuit, and might scatter it abroad 
trivial—peopl who seem to lie outsid the path of 
provid? bulstrod had never said to himself beforehand, “
daughter shall not be found”—nevertheless when the moment came he 
her exist hidden; and when other moment follow, he sooth 
mother with consol in the probabl that the unhappi young 
might be no more.

there were hour in which bulstrod felt that hi action 
unright; but how could he go back? he had mental exercis, 
himself nought, laid hold on redempt, and went on in hi cours 
instrument. and after five year death again came to widen 
path, by take awai hi wife. he did gradual withdraw hi capit,
but he did not make the sacrific requisit to put an end to 
busi, which wa carri on for thirteen year afterward befor 
final collaps. meanwhil nichola bulstrod had us hi 
thousand discreetli, and wa becom provinci, solidli import—
banker, a churchman, a public benefactor; also a sleep partner 
trade concern, in which hi abil wa direct to economi in 
raw materi, as in the case of the dye which rot mr. vinci’s silk.
and now, when thi respect had last undisturb for 
thirti year—when all that preced it had long lain benumb in 
conscious—that past had risen and immers hi thought as if 
the terribl irrupt of a new sens overburthen the feebl be.

meanwhil, in hi convers with raffl, he had learn 
moment, someth which enter activ into the struggl of 
long and terror. there, he thought, lai an open 
spiritu, perhap toward materi rescu.

the spiritu kind of rescu wa a genuin need with him. there mai 
coars hypocrit, who conscious affect belief and emot for 
sake of gull the world, but bulstrod wa not on of them. he 
simpli a man whose desir had been stronger than hi 
belief, and who had gradual explain the gratif of 
desir into satisfactori agreement with those belief. if thi 
hypocrisi, it is a process which show itself occasion in us all,
to whatev confess we belong, and whether we believ in the 
perfect of our race or in the nearest date fix for the end of 
world; whether we regard the earth as a putrefi nidu for a 
remnant, includ ourselv, or have a passion belief in 
solidar of mankind.

the servic he could do to the caus of religion had been through 
the ground he alleg to himself for hi choic of action: it had 
the motiv which he had pour out in hi prayer. who would us 
and posit better than he meant to us them? who could surpass him 
self-abhorr and exalt of god’s caus? and to mr. 
god’s caus wa someth distinct from hi own rectitud of conduct:
it enforc a discrimin of god’s enemi, who were to be 
mere as instrument, and whom it would be as well if possibl to 
out of monei and consequ influenc. also, profit invest 
trade where the power of the princ of thi world show it 
activ devic, becam sanctifi by a right applic of the 
in the hand of god’s servant.

thi implicit reason is essenti no more peculiar to 
belief than the us of wide phrase for narrow motiv is peculiar 
englishmen. there is no gener doctrin which is not capabl of 
out our moral if uncheck by the deep-seat habit of 
fellow-feel with individu fellow-men.

but a man who believ in someth els than hi own greed, 
necessarili a conscienc or standard to which he more or less 
himself. bulstrod’s standard had been hi servic to god’
caus: “i am sin and nought—a vessel to be consecr by us—
us me!”—had been the mould into which he had constrain hi 
need of be someth import and predomin. and now had come 
moment in which that mould seem in danger of be broken and 
cast awai.

what if the act he had reconcil himself to becaus thei made him 
stronger instrument of the divin glori, were to becom the pretext 
the scoffer, and a darken of that glori? if thi were to be 
rule of provid, he wa cast out from the templ as on who 
brought unclean offer.

he had long pour out utter of repent. but todai a 
had come which wa of a bitter flavor, and a threaten 
urg him to a kind of propiti which wa not simpli a 
transact. the divin tribun had chang it aspect for him;
self-prostrat wa no longer enough, and he must bring restitut 
hi hand. it wa realli befor hi god that bulstrod wa about 
attempt such restitut as seem possibl: a great dread had 
hi suscept frame, and the scorch approach of shame wrought 
him a new spiritu need. night and dai, while the 
threaten past wa make a conscienc within him, he wa think 
what mean he could recov peac and trust—by what sacrific he 
stai the rod. hi belief in these moment of dread wa, that if 
spontan did someth right, god would save him from 
consequ of wrong-do. for religion can onli chang when 
emot which fill it ar chang; and the religion of person 
remain nearli at the level of the savag.

he had seen raffl actual go awai on the brass coach, and 
wa a temporari relief; it remov the pressur of an immedi dread,
but did not put an end to the spiritu conflict and the need to 
protect. at last he came to a difficult resolv, and wrote a 
to will ladislaw, beg him to be at the shrub that even for 
privat interview at nine o’clock. will had felt no particular 
at the request, and connect it with some new notion about 
“pioneer;” but when he wa shown into mr. bulstrod’s privat room, 
wa struck with the painfulli worn look on the banker’s face, and 
go to sai, “ar you ill?” when, check himself in that abrupt,
he onli inquir after mr. bulstrod, and her satisfact with 
pictur bought for her.

“thank you, she is quit satisfi; she ha gone out with her 
thi even. i beg you to come, mr. ladislaw, becaus i have 
commun of a veri privat—inde, i will sai, of a 
confidenti natur, which i desir to make to you. noth, i 
sai, ha been farther from your thought than that there had 
import ti in the past which could connect your histori with mine.”

will felt someth like an electr shock. he wa alreadi in a 
of keen sensit and hardli allai agit on the subject 
ti in the past, and hi presenti were not agreeabl. it 
like the fluctuat of a dream—as if the action begun by that 
bloat stranger were be carri on by thi pale-ei sickli 
piec of respect, whose subdu tone and glib formal 
speech were at thi moment almost as repuls to him as 
rememb contrast. he answer, with a mark chang of color—

“no, inde, noth.”

“you see befor you, mr. ladislaw, a man who is deepli stricken. 
for the urgenc of conscienc and the knowledg that i am befor 
bar of on who seeth not as man seeth, i should be under no 
to make the disclosur which ha been my object in ask you to 
here to-night. so far as human law go, you have no claim on 
whatev.”

will wa even more uncomfort than wonder. mr. bulstrod 
paus, lean hi head on hi hand, and look at the floor. but 
now fix hi examin glanc on will and said—

“i am told that your mother’s name wa sarah dunkirk, and that she 
awai from her friend to go on the stage. also, that your father wa 
on time much emaci by ill. mai i ask if you can confirm 
statement?”

“ye, thei ar all true,” said will, struck with the order in which 
inquiri had come, that might have been expect to be preliminari 
the banker’s previou hint. but mr. bulstrod had to-night 
the order of hi emot; he entertain no doubt that the 
for restitut had come, and he had an overpow impuls 
the penitenti express by which he wa deprec chastis.

“do you know ani particular of your mother’s famili?” he continu.

“no; she never like to speak of them. she wa a veri gener,
honor woman,” said will, almost angrili.

“i do not wish to alleg anyth against her. did she never 
her mother to you at all?”

“i have heard her sai that she thought her mother did not know 
reason of her run awai. she said ‘poor mother’ in a piti tone.”

“that mother becam my wife,” said bulstrod, and then paus a 
befor he ad, “you have a claim on me, mr. ladislaw: as i 
befor, not a legal claim, but on which my conscienc recogn. 
wa enrich by that marriag—a result which would probabl not 
taken place—certainli not to the same extent—if your grandmoth 
have discov her daughter. that daughter, i gather, is no 
live!”

“no,” said will, feel suspicion and repugn rise so 
within him, that without quit know what he did, he took hi 
from the floor and stood up. the impuls within him wa to reject 
disclos connect.

“prai be seat, mr. ladislaw,” said bulstrod, anxious. “
you ar startl by the sudden of thi discoveri. but i 
your patienc with on who is alreadi bow down by inward trial.”

will reseat himself, feel some piti which wa half contempt 
thi voluntari self-abas of an elderli man.

“it is my wish, mr. ladislaw, to make amend for the depriv 
befel your mother. i know that you ar without fortun, and i wish 
suppli you adequ from a store which would have probabl 
been your had your grandmoth been certain of your mother’s 
and been abl to find her.”

mr. bulstrod paus. he felt that he wa perform a strike 
of scrupulos in the judgment of hi auditor, and a penitenti 
in the ey of god. he had no clew to the state of will ladislaw’
mind, smart as it wa from the clear hint of raffl, and with 
natur quick in construct stimul by the expect 
discoveri which he would have been glad to conjur back 
dark. will made no answer for sever moment, till mr. bulstrod,
who at the end of hi speech had cast hi ey on the floor, now 
them with an examin glanc, which will met fulli, sai—

“i suppos you did know of my mother’s exist, and knew where 
might have been found.”

bulstrod shrank—there wa a visibl quiver in hi face and hand.
he wa total unprepar to have hi advanc met in thi wai, or 
find himself urg into more revel than he had beforehand set 
as need. but at that moment he dare not tell a lie, and he 
suddenli uncertain of hi ground which he had trodden with 
confid befor.

“i will not deni that you conjectur rightli,” he answer, with 
falter in hi tone. “and i wish to make aton to you as the 
still remain who ha suffer a loss through me. you enter, i trust,
into my purpos, mr. ladislaw, which ha a refer to higher 
mere human claim, and as i have alreadi said, is 
independ of ani legal compuls. i am readi to narrow my 
resourc and the prospect of my famili by bind myself to allow 
five hundr pound yearli dure my life, and to leav you 
proport capit at my death—nai, to do still more, if more 
be definit necessari to ani laudabl project on your part.” mr.
bulstrod had gone on to particular in the expect that 
would work strongli on ladislaw, and merg other feel in 
accept.

but will wa look as stubborn as possibl, with hi lip pout 
hi finger in hi side-pocket. he wa not in the least touch, 
said firmli,—

“befor i make ani repli to your proposit, mr. bulstrod, i must 
you to answer a question or two. were you connect with the 
by which that fortun you speak of wa origin made?”

mr. bulstrod’s thought wa, “raffl ha told him.” how could 
refus to answer when he had volunt what drew forth the question?
he answer, “ye.”

“and wa that busi—or wa it not—a thoroughli dishonor on—nai,
on that, if it natur had been made public, might have rank 
concern in it with thiev and convict?”

will’s tone had a cut bitter: he wa move to put hi 
as nakedli as he could.

bulstrod redden with irrepress anger. he had been prepar for 
scene of self-abas, but hi intens pride and hi habit 
supremaci overpow penit, and even dread, when thi young man,
whom he had meant to benefit, turn on him with the air of a judg.

“the busi wa establish befor i becam connect with it, sir;
nor is it for you to institut an inquiri of that kind,” he answer,
not rais hi voic, but speak with quick defiant.

“ye, it is,” said will, start up again with hi hat in hi hand.
“it is emin mine to ask such question, when i have to 
whether i will have transact with you and accept your monei. 
unblemish honor is import to me. it is import to me to have 
stain on my birth and connect. and now i find there is a 
which i can’t help. my mother felt it, and tri to keep as clear of 
as she could, and so will i. you shall keep your ill-gotten monei. if 
had ani fortun of my own, i would willingli pai it to ani on 
could disprov what you have told me. what i have to thank you for 
that you kept the monei till now, when i can refus it. it ought to 
with a man’s self that he is a gentleman. good-night, sir.”

bulstrod wa go to speak, but will, with determin quick, 
out of the room in an instant, and in anoth the hall-door had 
behind him. he wa too strongli possess with passion 
against thi inherit blot which had been thrust on hi knowledg 
reflect at present whether he had not been too hard on bulstrod—
arrogantli merciless toward a man of sixti, who wa make effort 
retriev when time had render them vain.

no third person listen could have thoroughli understood 
impetuos of will’s repuls or the bitter of hi word. no 
but himself then knew how everyth connect with the sentiment 
hi own digniti had an immedi bear for him on hi relat 
dorothea and to mr. casaubon’s treatment of him. and in the rush 
impuls by which he flung back that offer of bulstrod’s there 
mingl the sens that it would have been imposs for him ever 
tell dorothea that he had accept it.

as for bulstrod—when will wa gone he suffer a violent reaction, 
wept like a woman. it wa the first time he had encount an 
express of scorn from ani man higher than raffl; and with 
scorn hurri like venom through hi system, there wa no 
left to consol. but the relief of weep had to be check. 
wife and daughter soon came home from hear the address of 
orient missionari, and were full of regret that papa had not heard,
in the first instanc, the interest thing which thei tri 
repeat to him.

perhap, through all other hidden thought, the on that breath 
comfort wa, that will ladislaw at least wa not like to publish 
had taken place that even.




chapter lxii.

he wa a squyer of low degr,
that love the king’s daughter of hungri.
—_old romanc_.


will ladislaw’s mind wa now wholli bent on see dorothea again, 
forthwith quit middlemarch. the morn after hi agit 
with bulstrod he wrote a brief letter to her, sai that 
caus had detain him in the neighborhood longer than he 
expect, and ask her permiss to call again at lowick at 
hour which she would mention on the earliest possibl dai, he 
anxiou to depart, but unwil to do so until she had grant him 
interview. he left the letter at the offic, order the messeng 
carri it to lowick manor, and wait for an answer.

ladislaw felt the awkward of ask for more last word. hi 
farewel had been made in the hear of sir jame chettam, and 
been announc as final even to the butler. it is certainli try to 
man’s digniti to reappear when he is not expect to do so: a 
farewel ha patho in it, but to come back for a second lend 
open to comedi, and it wa possibl even that there might be 
sneer afloat about will’s motiv for linger. still it wa on 
whole more satisfactori to hi feel to take the directest mean 
see dorothea, than to us ani devic which might give an air 
chanc to a meet of which he wish her to understand that it 
what he earnestli sought. when he had part from her befor, he 
been in ignor of fact which gave a new aspect to the 
between them, and made a more absolut sever than he had 
believ in. he knew noth of dorothea’s privat fortun, and 
littl us to reflect on such matter, took it for grant 
accord to mr. casaubon’s arrang marriag to him, will ladislaw,
would mean that she consent to be penniless. that wa not what 
could wish for even in hi secret heart, or even if she had been 
to meet such hard contrast for hi sake. and then, too, there wa 
fresh smart of that disclosur about hi mother’s famili, which 
known would be an ad reason why dorothea’s friend should look 
upon him as utterli below her. the secret hope that after some year 
might come back with the sens that he had at least a person 
equal to her wealth, seem now the dreami continu of a dream.
thi chang would sure justifi him in ask dorothea to receiv 
onc more.

but dorothea on that morn wa not at home to receiv will’s note. 
consequ of a letter from her uncl announc hi intent to 
at home in a week, she had driven first to freshitt to carri the new,
mean to go on to the grang to deliv some order with which 
uncl had intrust her—think, as he said, “a littl 
occup of thi sort good for a widow.”

if will ladislaw could have overheard some of the talk at freshitt 
morn, he would have felt all hi supposit confirm as to 
readi of certain peopl to sneer at hi linger in 
neighborhood. sir jame, inde, though much reliev 
dorothea, had been on the watch to learn ladislaw’s movement, and 
an instruct inform in mr. standish, who wa necessarili in 
confid on thi matter. that ladislaw had stai in 
nearli two month after he had declar that he wa go immedi,
wa a fact to embitt sir jame’s suspicion, or at least to 
hi avers to a “young fellow” whom he repres to himself 
slight, volatil, and like enough to show such reckless 
natur went along with a posit unrivet by famili ti or 
strict profess. but he had just heard someth from standish which,
while it justifi these surmis about will, offer a mean 
nullifi all danger with regard to dorothea.

unwont circumst mai make us all rather unlik ourselv: 
ar condit under which the most majest person is oblig 
sneez, and our emot ar liabl to be act on in the 
incongru manner. good sir jame wa thi morn so far 
himself that he wa irrit anxiou to sai someth to dorothea on 
subject which he usual avoid as if it had been a matter of shame 
them both. he could not us celia as a medium, becaus he did 
choos that she should know the kind of gossip he had in hi mind; 
befor dorothea happen to arriv he had been try to imagin how,
with hi shyness and unreadi tongu, he could ever manag to 
hi commun. her unexpect presenc brought him to 
hopeless in hi own power of sai anyth unpleas; 
desper suggest a resourc; he sent the groom on an 
hors across the park with a pencil note to mr. cadwallad, 
alreadi knew the gossip, and would think it no compromis of herself 
repeat it as often as requir.

dorothea wa detain on the good pretext that mr. garth, whom 
want to see, wa expect at the hall within the hour, and she 
still talk to caleb on the gravel when sir jame, on the watch 
the rector’s wife, saw her come and met her with the need hint.

“enough! i understand,”—said mr. cadwallad. “you shall be innoc.
i am such a blackamoor that i cannot smirch myself.”

“i don’t mean that it’s of ani consequ,” said sir jame, 
that mr. cadwallad should understand too much. “onli it is 
that dorothea should know there ar reason why she should not 
him again; and i realli can’t sai so to her. it will come lightli 
you.”

it came veri lightli inde. when dorothea quit caleb and turn 
meet them, it appear that mr. cadwallad had step across 
park by the merest chanc in the world, just to chat with celia in 
matronli wai about the babi. and so mr. brook wa come back?
delight!—come back, it wa to be hope, quit cure 
parliamentari fever and pioneer. apropo of the “pioneer”—
had prophesi that it would soon be like a dy dolphin, and turn 
color for want of know how to help itself, becaus mr. brook’
proteg, the brilliant young ladislaw, wa gone or go. had sir 
heard that?

the three were walk along the gravel slowli, and sir jame, 
asid to whip a shrub, said he had heard someth of that sort.

“all fals!” said mr. cadwallad. “he is not gone, or go,
appar; the ‘pioneer’ keep it color, and mr. orlando ladislaw 
make a sad dark-blue scandal by warbl continu with your mr.
lydgat’s wife, who thei tell me is as pretti as pretti can be. 
seem nobodi ever goe into the hous without find thi 
gentleman ly on the rug or warbl at the piano. but the peopl 
manufactur town ar alwai disreput.”

“you began by sai that on report wa fals, mr. cadwallad, and 
believ thi is fals too,” said dorothea, with indign energi; “
least, i feel sure it is a misrepresent. i will not hear ani 
spoken of mr. ladislaw; he ha alreadi suffer too much injustic.”

dorothea when thoroughli move care littl what ani on thought of 
feel; and even if she had been abl to reflect, she would have 
it petti to keep silenc at injuri word about will from fear 
be herself misunderstood. her face wa flush and her lip trembl.

sir jame, glanc at her, repent of hi stratagem; but mr.
cadwallad, equal to all occas, spread the palm of her 
outward and said—“heaven grant it, my dear!—i mean that all bad 
about anybodi mai be fals. but it is a piti that young lydgat 
have marri on of these middlemarch girl. consid he’s a son 
somebodi, he might have got a woman with good blood in her vein, 
not too young, who would have put up with hi profess. there’s 
harfag, for instanc, whose friend don’t know what to do with her;
and she ha a portion. then we might have had her among us.
howev!—it’s no us be wise for other peopl. where is celia? 
let us go in.”

“i am go on immedi to tipton,” said dorothea, rather haughtili.
“good-by.”

sir jame could sai noth as he accompani her to the carriag. 
wa altogeth discont with the result of a contriv which 
cost him some secret humili beforehand.

dorothea drove along between the berri hedgerow and the 
corn-field, not see or hear anyth around. the tear came 
roll down her cheek, but she did not know it. the world, it seem,
wa turn ugli and hate, and there wa no place for 
trust. “it is not true—it is not true!” wa the voic within 
that she listen to; but all the while a remembr to which 
had alwai clung a vagu uneasi would thrust itself on 
attent—the remembr of that dai when she had found will 
with mr. lydgat, and had heard hi voic accompani by the piano.

“he said he would never do anyth that i disapprov—i wish i 
have told him that i disapprov of that,” said poor dorothea,
inwardli, feel a strang altern between anger with will and 
passion defenc of him. “thei all try to blacken him befor me; 
i will care for no pain, if he is not to blame. i alwai believ 
wa good.”—these were her last thought befor she felt that 
carriag wa pass under the archwai of the lodg-gate at the grang,
when she hurriedli press her handkerchief to her face and began 
think of her errand. the coachman beg leav to take out the 
for half an hour as there wa someth wrong with a shoe; 
dorothea, have the sens that she wa go to rest, took off 
glove and bonnet, while she wa lean against a statu in 
entranc-hall, and talk to the housekeep. at last she said—

“i must stai here a littl, mr. kell. i will go into the librari 
write you some memoranda from my uncl’s letter, if you will open 
shutter for me.”

“the shutter ar open, madam,” said mr. kell, follow dorothea, 
had walk along as she spoke. “mr. ladislaw is there, look 
someth.”

(will had come to fetch a portfolio of hi own sketch which he 
miss in the act of pack hi movabl, and did not choos to 
behind.)

dorothea’s heart seem to turn over as if it had had a blow, but 
wa not percept check: in truth, the sens that will wa 
wa for the moment all-satisfi to her, like the sight of 
preciou that on ha lost. when she reach the door she said to mr.
kell—

“go in first, and tell him that i am here.”

will had found hi portfolio, and had laid it on the tabl at the 
end of the room, to turn over the sketch and pleas himself 
look at the memor piec of art which had a relat to 
too mysteri for dorothea. he wa smile at it still, and 
the sketch into order with the thought that he might find a 
from her await him at middlemarch, when mr. kell close to hi 
said—

“mr. casaubon is come in, sir.”

will turn round quickli, and the next moment dorothea wa enter.
as mr. kell close the door behind her thei met: each wa look 
the other, and conscious wa overflow by someth 
suppress utter. it wa not confus that kept them silent, 
thei both felt that part wa near, and there is no shamefaced 
a sad part.

she move automat toward her uncl’s chair against 
write-tabl, and will, after draw it out a littl for her, went 
few pace off and stood opposit to her.

“prai sit down,” said dorothea, cross her hand on her lap; “i 
veri glad you were here.” will thought that her face look just as 
did when she first shook hand with him in rome; for her widow’s cap,
fix in her bonnet, had gone off with it, and he could see that 
had late been shed tear. but the mixtur of anger in 
agit had vanish at the sight of him; she had been us, 
thei were face to face, alwai to feel confid and the happi 
which come with mutual understand, and how could other peopl’
word hinder that effect on a sudden? let the music which can 
possess of our frame and fill the air with joi for us, sound 
more—what doe it signifi that we heard it found fault with in 
absenc?

“i have sent a letter to lowick manor to-dai, ask leav to see you,”
said will, seat himself opposit to her. “i am go 
immedi, and i could not go without speak to you again.”

“i thought we had part when you came to lowick mani week ago—
thought you were go then,” said dorothea, her voic trembl 
littl.

“ye; but i wa in ignor then of thing which i know now—
which have alter my feel about the futur. when i saw you befor,
i wa dream that i might come back some dai. i don’t think i 
shall—now.” will paus here.

“you wish me to know the reason?” said dorothea, timidli.

“ye,” said will, impetu, shake hi head backward, and 
awai from her with irrit in hi face. “of cours i must wish it. 
have been grossli insult in your ey and in the ey of other.
there ha been a mean implic against my charact. i wish you 
know that under no circumst would i have lower myself by—
no circumst would i have given men the chanc of sai that 
sought monei under the pretext of seek—someth els. there wa 
need of other safeguard against me—the safeguard of wealth wa enough.”

will rose from hi chair with the last word and went—he hardli 
where; but it wa to the project window nearest him, which had 
open as now about the same season a year ago, when he and dorothea 
stood within it and talk togeth. her whole heart wa go out 
thi moment in sympathi with will’s indign: she onli want 
convinc him that she had never done him injustic, and he seem 
have turn awai from her as if she too had been part of the 
world.

“it would be veri unkind of you to suppos that i ever attribut 
mean to you,” she began. then in her ardent wai, want to 
with him, she move from her chair and went in front of him to her 
place in the window, sai, “do you suppos that i ever disbeliev 
you?”

when will saw her there, he gave a start and move backward out of 
window, without meet her glanc. dorothea wa hurt by thi 
follow up the previou anger of hi tone. she wa readi to sai 
it wa as hard on her as on him, and that she wa helpless; but 
strang particular of their relat which neither of them 
explicitli mention kept her alwai in dread of sai too much. at 
moment she had no belief that will would in ani case have want 
marri her, and she fear us word which might impli such a belief.
she onli said earnestli, recur to hi last word—

“i am sure no safeguard wa ever need against you.”

will did not answer. in the stormi fluctuat of hi feel 
word of her seem to him cruelli neutral, and he look pale 
miser after hi angri outburst. he went to the tabl and 
up hi portfolio, while dorothea look at him from the distanc. 
were wast these last moment togeth in wretch silenc. 
could he sai, sinc what had got obstin uppermost in hi mind 
the passion love for her which he forbad himself to utter? 
could she sai, sinc she might offer him no help—sinc she wa 
to keep the monei that ought to have been hi?—sinc to-dai he 
not to respond as he us to do to her thorough trust and like?

but will at last turn awai from hi portfolio and approach 
window again.

“i must go,” he said, with that peculiar look of the ey 
sometim accompani bitter feel, as if thei had been tire 
burn with gaze too close at a light.

“what shall you do in life?” said dorothea, timidli. “have 
intent remain just the same as when we said good-by befor?”

“ye,” said will, in a tone that seem to waiv the subject 
uninterest. “i shall work awai at the first thing that offer. 
suppos on get a habit of do without happi or hope.”

“oh, what sad word!” said dorothea, with a danger tendenc to sob.
then try to smile, she ad, “we us to agre that we were 
in speak too strongli.”

“i have not spoken too strongli now,” said will, lean back 
the angl of the wall. “there ar certain thing which a man can 
go through onc in hi life; and he must know some time or other 
the best is over with him. thi experi ha happen to me while 
am veri young—that is all. what i care more for than i can ever 
for anyth els is absolut forbidden to me—i don’t mean mere 
be out of my reach, but forbidden me, even if it were within 
reach, by my own pride and honor—by everyth i respect myself for. 
cours i shall go on live as a man might do who had seen heaven in 
tranc.”

will paus, imagin that it would be imposs for dorothea 
misunderstand thi; inde he felt that he wa contradict 
and offend against hi self-approv in speak to her so plainli;
but still—it could not be fairli call woo a woman to tell her 
he would never woo her. it must be admit to be a ghostli kind 
woo.

but dorothea’s mind wa rapidli go over the past with quit 
vision than hi. the thought that she herself might be what will 
care for did throb through her an instant, but then came doubt: 
memori of the littl thei had live through togeth turn pale 
shrank befor the memori which suggest how much fuller might 
been the intercours between will and some on els with whom he 
had constant companionship. everyth he had said might refer to 
other relat, and whatev had pass between him and herself 
thoroughli explain by what she had alwai regard as their 
friendship and the cruel obstruct thrust upon it by her husband’
injuri act. dorothea stood silent, with her ey cast down dreamili,
while imag crowd upon her which left the sicken certainti 
will wa refer to mr. lydgat. but why sicken? he want her 
know that here too hi conduct should be abov suspicion.

will wa not surpris at her silenc. hi mind also wa 
busi while he watch her, and he wa feel rather wildli 
someth must happen to hinder their part—some miracl, 
noth in their own deliber speech. yet, after all, had she 
love for him?—he could not pretend to himself that he would 
believ her to be without that pain. he could not deni that a 
long for the assur that she love him wa at the root of all 
word.

neither of them knew how long thei stood in that wai. dorothea 
rais her ey, and wa about to speak, when the door open and 
footman came to sai—

“the hors ar readi, madam, whenev you like to start.”

“present,” said dorothea. then turn to will, she said, “i 
some memoranda to write for the housekeep.”

“i must go,” said will, when the door had close again—
toward her. “the dai after to-morrow i shall leav middlemarch.”

“you have act in everi wai rightli,” said dorothea, in a low tone,
feel a pressur at her heart which made it difficult to speak.

she put out her hand, and will took it for an instant without speak,
for her word had seem to him cruelli cold and unlik herself. 
ey met, but there wa discont in hi, and in her there wa 
sad. he turn awai and took hi portfolio under hi arm.

“i have never done you injustic. pleas rememb me,” said dorothea,
repress a rise sob.

“why should you sai that?” said will, with irrit. “as if i 
not in danger of forget everyth els.”

he had realli a movement of anger against her at that moment, and 
impel him to go awai without paus. it wa all on flash 
dorothea—hi last word—hi distant bow to her as he reach 
door—the sens that he wa no longer there. she sank into the chair,
and for a few moment sat like a statu, while imag and emot 
hurri upon her. joi came first, in spite of the threaten 
behind it—joi in the impress that it wa realli herself whom 
love and wa renounc, that there wa realli no other love 
permiss, more blameworthi, which honor wa hurri him awai from.
thei were part all the same, but—dorothea drew a deep breath and 
her strength return—she could think of him unrestrainedli. at 
moment the part wa easi to bear: the first sens of love 
be love exclud sorrow. it wa as if some hard ici pressur 
melt, and her conscious had room to expand: her past wa 
back to her with larger interpret. the joi wa not 
less—perhap it wa the more complet just then—becaus of 
irrevoc part; for there wa no reproach, no contemptu 
to imagin in ani ey or from ani lip. he had act so as to 
reproach, and make wonder respect.

ani on watch her might have seen that there wa a 
thought within her. just as when invent power is work with 
eas some small claim on the attent is fulli met as if it were 
a cranni open to the sunlight, it wa easi now for dorothea to 
her memoranda. she spoke her last word to the housekeep in 
tone, and when she seat herself in the carriag her ey were 
and her cheek bloom under the dismal bonnet. she threw back 
heavi “weeper,” and look befor her, wonder which road will 
taken. it wa in her natur to be proud that he wa blameless, 
through all her feel there ran thi vein—“i wa right to 
him.”

the coachman wa us to drive hi grai at a good pace, mr. 
be unenjoi and impati in everyth awai from hi desk, 
want to get to the end of all journei; and dorothea wa now 
along quickli. drive wa pleasant, for rain in the night had laid 
dust, and the blue sky look far off, awai from the region of 
great cloud that sail in mass. the earth look like a happi 
under the vast heaven, and dorothea wa wish that she 
overtak will and see him onc more.

after a turn of the road, there he wa with the portfolio under 
arm; but the next moment she wa pass him while he rais hi hat,
and she felt a pang at be seat there in a sort of exalt,
leav him behind. she could not look back at him. it wa as if 
crowd of indiffer object had thrust them asund, and forc 
along differ path, take them farther and farther awai from 
other, and make it useless to look back. she could no more make 
sign that would seem to sai, “need we part?” than she could stop 
carriag to wait for him. nai, what a world of reason crowd upon 
against ani movement of her thought toward a futur that might 
the decis of thi dai!

“i onli wish i had known befor—i wish he knew—then we could be 
happi in think of each other, though we ar forev part. and if 
could but have given him the monei, and made thing easier 
him!”—were the long that came back the most persist. and yet,
so heavili did the world weigh on her in spite of her 
energi, that with thi idea of will as in need of such help and at 
disadvantag with the world, there came alwai the vision of 
unfitting of ani closer relat between them which lai in 
opinion of everi on connect with her. she felt to the full all 
imper of the motiv which urg will’s conduct. how could 
dream of her defi the barrier that her husband had place 
them?—how could she ever sai to herself that she would defi it?

will’s certainti as the carriag grew smaller in the distanc, had 
more bitter in it. veri slight matter were enough to gall him 
hi sensit mood, and the sight of dorothea drive past him while 
felt himself plod along as a poor devil seek a posit in 
world which in hi present temper offer him littl that he covet,
made hi conduct seem a mere matter of necess, and took awai 
sustain of resolv. after all, he had no assur that she 
him: could ani man pretend that he wa simpli glad in such a case 
have the suffer all on hi own side?

that even will spent with the lydgat; the next even he 
gone.




book vii.
two temptat.




chapter lxiii.

these littl thing ar great to littl man.—goldsmith.


“have you seen much of your scientif phoenix, lydgat, late?” 
mr. toller at on of hi christma dinner-parti, speak to mr.
farebroth on hi right hand.

“not much, i am sorri to sai,” answer the vicar, accustom to 
mr. toller’s banter about hi belief in the new medic light. “i 
out of the wai and he is too busi.”

“is he? i am glad to hear it,” said dr. minchin, with mingl 
and surpris.

“he give a great deal of time to the new hospit,” said mr.
farebroth, who had hi reason for continu the subject: “i hear 
that from my neighbor, mr. casaubon, who goe there often. she 
lydgat is indefatig, and is make a fine thing of bulstrod’
institut. he is prepar a new ward in case of the cholera 
to us.”

“and prepar theori of treatment to try on the patient, 
suppos,” said mr. toller.

“come, toller, be candid,” said mr. farebroth. “you ar too 
not to see the good of a bold fresh mind in medicin, as well as 
everyth els; and as to cholera, i fanci, none of you ar veri 
what you ought to do. if a man goe a littl too far along a new road,
it is usual himself that he harm more than ani on els.”

“i am sure you and wrench ought to be oblig to him,” said dr.
minchin, look toward toller, “for he ha sent you the cream 
peacock’s patient.”

“lydgat ha been live at a great rate for a young beginn,” 
mr. harri toller, the brewer. “i suppos hi relat in the 
back him up.”

“i hope so,” said mr. chich, “els he ought not to have marri 
nice girl we were all so fond of. hang it, on ha a grudg against 
man who carri off the prettiest girl in the town.”

“ay, by god! and the best too,” said mr. standish.

“my friend vinci didn’t half like the marriag, i know that,” said mr.
chich. “_he_ wouldn’t do much. how the relat on the other 
mai have come down i can’t sai.” there wa an emphat kind 
retic in mr. chich’s manner of speak.

“oh, i shouldn’t think lydgat ever look to practic for a live,”
said mr. toller, with a slight touch of sarcasm, and there the 
wa drop.

thi wa not the first time that mr. farebroth had heard hint 
lydgat’s expens be obvious too great to be met by hi practic,
but he thought it not unlik that there were resourc 
expect which excus the larg outlai at the time of lydgat’
marriag, and which might hinder ani bad consequ from 
disappoint in hi practic. on even, when he took the pain 
go to middlemarch on purpos to have a chat with lydgat as of old, 
notic in him an air of excit effort quit unlik hi usual easi 
of keep silenc or break it with abrupt energi whenev he 
anyth to sai. lydgat talk persist when thei were in 
work-room, put argument for and against the probabl of 
biolog view; but he had none of those definit thing to sai or 
show which give the waymark of a patient uninterrupt pursuit, 
as he us himself to insist on, sai that “there must be a 
and diastol in all inquiri,” and that “a man’s mind must 
continu expand and shrink between the whole human horizon 
the horizon of an object-glass.” that even he seem to be 
wide for the sake of resist ani person bear; and befor 
thei went into the draw room, where lydgat, have ask 
to give them music, sank back in hi chair in silenc, but with 
strang light in hi ey. “he mai have been take an opiat,” wa 
thought that cross mr. farebroth’s mind—“tic-douloureux perhap—
medic worri.”

it did not occur to him that lydgat’s marriag wa not delight: 
believ, as the rest did, that rosamond wa an amiabl, 
creatur, though he had alwai thought her rather uninterest—
littl too much the pattern-card of the finish-school; and 
mother could not forgiv rosamond becaus she never seem to see 
henrietta nobl wa in the room. “howev, lydgat fell in love 
her,” said the vicar to himself, “and she must be to hi tast.”

mr. farebroth wa awar that lydgat wa a proud man, but have 
littl correspond fibr in himself, and perhap too littl 
about person digniti, except the digniti of not be mean 
foolish, he could hardli allow enough for the wai in which 
shrank, as from a burn, from the utter of ani word about 
privat affair. and soon after that convers at mr. toller’s, 
vicar learn someth which made him watch the more eagerli for 
opportun of indirectli let lydgat know that if he want 
open himself about ani difficulti there wa a friendli ear readi.

the opportun came at mr. vinci’s, where, on new year’s dai, 
wa a parti, to which mr. farebroth wa irresist invit, on 
plea that he must not forsak hi old friend on the first new year 
hi be a greater man, and rector as well as vicar. and thi 
wa thoroughli friendli: all the ladi of the farebroth famili 
present; the vinci children all dine at the tabl, and fred 
persuad hi mother that if she did not invit mari garth, 
farebroth would regard it as a slight to themselv, mari 
their particular friend. mari came, and fred wa in high spirit,
though hi enjoy wa of a checker kind—triumph that hi 
should see mari’s import with the chief personag in the 
be much streak with jealousi when mr. farebroth sat down by her.
fred us to be much more easi about hi own accomplish in 
dai when he had not begun to dread be “bowl out by farebroth,”
and thi terror wa still befor him. mr. vinci, in her 
matronli bloom, look at mari’s littl figur, rough wavi hair, 
visag quit without lili and rose, and wonder; 
unsuccessfulli to fanci herself care about mari’s appear 
wed cloth, or feel complac in grandchildren who 
“featur” the garth. howev, the parti wa a merri on, and mari 
particularli bright; be glad, for fred’s sake, that hi friend 
get kinder to her, and be also quit will that thei 
see how much she wa valu by other whom thei must admit to 
judg.

mr. farebroth notic that lydgat seem bore, and that mr. 
spoke as littl as possibl to hi son-in-law. rosamond wa 
grace and calm, and onli a subtl observ such as the vicar 
not been rous to bestow on her would have perceiv the total 
of that interest in her husband’s presenc which a love wife is 
to betrai, even if etiquett keep her aloof from him. when lydgat 
take part in the convers, she never look toward him ani 
than if she had been a sculptur psych model to look anoth wai:
and when, after be call out for an hour or two, he re-enter 
room, she seem unconsci of the fact, which eighteen month 
would have had the effect of a numer befor cipher. in realiti,
howev, she wa intens awar of lydgat’s voic and movement; 
her pretti good-temper air of unconsci wa a studi 
by which she satisfi her inward opposit to him without 
of proprieti. when the ladi were in the draw-room after 
had been call awai from the dessert, mr. farebroth, when 
happen to be near her, said—“you have to give up a great deal of 
husband’s societi, mr. lydgat.”

“ye, the life of a medic man is veri arduou: especi when he 
so devot to hi profess as mr. lydgat is,” said rosamond, who 
stand, and move easili awai at the end of thi correct 
speech.

“it is dreadfulli dull for her when there is no compani,” said mr.
vinci, who wa seat at the old ladi’s side. “i am sure i thought 
when rosamond wa ill, and i wa stai with her. you know, mr.
farebroth, our is a cheer hous. i am of a cheer 
myself, and mr. vinci alwai like someth to be go on. that 
what rosamond ha been us to. veri differ from a husband out 
odd hour, and never know when he will come home, and of a close,
proud disposit, _i_ think”—indiscreet mr. vinci did lower her 
slightli with thi parenthesi. “but rosamond alwai had an angel of 
temper; her brother us veri often not to pleas her, but she 
never the girl to show temper; from a babi she wa alwai as good 
good, and with a complexion beyond anyth. but my children ar 
good-temper, thank god.”

thi wa easili credibl to ani on look at mr. vinci as she 
back her broad cap-string, and smile toward her three littl girl,
ag from seven to eleven. but in that smile glanc she wa 
to includ mari garth, whom the three girl had got into a corner 
make her tell them stori. mari wa just finish the delici 
of rumpelstiltskin, which she had well by heart, becaus letti 
never tire of commun it to her ignor elder from a 
red volum. louisa, mr. vinci’s darl, now ran to her with wide-
seriou excit, cry, “oh mamma, mamma, the littl man stamp 
hard on the floor he couldn’t get hi leg out again!”

“bless you, my cherub!” said mamma; “you shall tell me all about 
to-morrow. go and listen!” and then, as her ey follow louisa 
toward the attract corner, she thought that if fred wish her 
invit mari again she would make no object, the children be 
pleas with her.

but present the corner becam still more anim, for mr.
farebroth came in, and seat himself behind louisa, took her on 
lap; whereupon the girl all insist that he must 
rumpelstiltskin, and mari must tell it over again. he insist too, 
mari, without fuss, began again in her neat fashion, with precis 
same word as befor. fred, who had also seat himself near, 
have felt unmix triumph in mari’s effect if mr. 
had not been look at her with evid admir, while 
dramat an intens interest in the tale to pleas the children.

“you will never care ani more about my on-ei giant, loo,” said 
at the end.

“ye, i shall. tell about him now,” said louisa.

“oh, i dare sai; i am quit cut out. ask mr. farebroth.”

“ye,” ad mari; “ask mr. farebroth to tell you about the 
whose beauti hous wa knock down by a giant name tom, and 
thought thei didn’t mind becaus he couldn’t hear them cry, or see 
us their pocket-handkerchief.”

“pleas,” said louisa, look up at the vicar.

“no, no, i am a grave old parson. if i try to draw a stori out of 
bag a sermon come instead. shall i preach you a sermon?” said he,
put on hi short-sight glass, and purs up hi lip.

“ye,” said louisa, falteringli.

“let me see, then. against cake: how cake ar bad thing, 
if thei ar sweet and have plum in them.”

louisa took the affair rather serious, and got down from the vicar’
knee to go to fred.

“ah, i see it will not do to preach on new year’s dai,” said mr.
farebroth, rise and walk awai. he had discov of late 
fred had becom jealou of him, and also that he himself wa not 
hi prefer for mari abov all other women.

“a delight young person is miss garth,” said mr. farebroth, 
had been watch her son’s movement.

“ye,” said mr. vinci, oblig to repli, as the old ladi turn to 
expectantli. “it is a piti she is not better-look.”

“i cannot sai that,” said mr. farebroth, decis. “i like 
counten. we must not alwai ask for beauti, when a good god 
seen fit to make an excel young woman without it. i put 
manner first, and miss garth will know how to conduct herself in 
station.”

the old ladi wa a littl sharp in her tone, have a 
refer to mari’s becom her daughter-in-law; for there wa 
inconveni in mari’s posit with regard to fred, that it wa 
suitabl to be made public, and henc the three ladi at 
parsonag were still hope that camden would choos miss garth.

new visitor enter, and the draw-room wa given up to music 
game, while whist-tabl were prepar in the quiet room on the 
side of the hall. mr. farebroth plai a rubber to satisfi 
mother, who regard her occasion whist as a protest against 
and novelti of opinion, in which light even a revok had it digniti.
but at the end he got mr. chich to take hi place, and left 
room. as he cross the hall, lydgat had just come in and wa 
off hi great-coat.

“you ar the man i wa go to look for,” said the vicar; and 
of enter the draw-room, thei walk along the hall and 
against the fireplac, where the frosti air help to make a 
bank. “you see, i can leav the whist-tabl easili enough,” he went on,
smile at lydgat, “now i don’t plai for monei. i ow that to you,
mr. casaubon sai.”

“how?” said lydgat, coldli.

“ah, you didn’t mean me to know it; i call that ungener retic.
you should let a man have the pleasur of feel that you have 
him a good turn. i don’t enter into some peopl’s dislik of 
under an oblig: upon my word, i prefer be under an 
to everybodi for behav well to me.”

“i can’t tell what you mean,” said lydgat, “unless it is that i 
spoke of you to mr. casaubon. but i did not think that she would 
her promis not to mention that i had done so,” said lydgat, 
hi back against the corner of the mantel-piec, and show 
radianc in hi face.

“it wa brook who let it out, onli the other dai. he paid me 
compliment of sai that he wa veri glad i had the live though 
had come across hi tactic, and had prais me up as a ken and 
tillotson, and that sort of thing, till mr. casaubon would hear of 
on els.”

“oh, brook is such a leaki-mind fool,” said lydgat, contemptu.

“well, i wa glad of the leaki then. i don’t see why you shouldn’
like me to know that you wish to do me a servic, my dear fellow. 
you certainli have done me on. it’s rather a strong check to on’
self-complac to find how much of on’s right do depend on 
be in want of monei. a man will not be tempt to sai the lord’
prayer backward to pleas the devil, if he doesn’t want the devil’
servic. i have no need to hang on the smile of chanc now.”

“i don’t see that there’s ani monei-get without chanc,” 
lydgat; “if a man get it in a profess, it’s pretti sure to come 
chanc.”

mr. farebroth thought he could account for thi speech, in 
contrast with lydgat’s former wai of talk, as the pervers 
will often spring from the moodi of a man ill at eas in 
affair. he answer in a tone of good-humor admiss—

“ah, there’s enorm patienc want with the wai of the world. but 
is the easier for a man to wait patient when he ha friend who 
him, and ask for noth better than to help him through, so far as 
li in their power.”

“oh ye,” said lydgat, in a careless tone, chang hi attitud 
look at hi watch. “peopl make much more of their difficulti 
thei need to do.”

he knew as distinctli as possibl that thi wa an offer of help 
himself from mr. farebroth, and he could not bear it. so 
determin ar we mortal, that, after have been long gratifi 
the sens that he had privat done the vicar a servic, 
suggest that the vicar discern hi need of a servic in 
made him shrink into unconquer retic. besid, behind 
make of such offer what els must come?—that he should “mention 
case,” impli that he want specif thing. at that moment, 
seem easier.

mr. farebroth wa too keen a man not to know the mean of 
repli, and there wa a certain massiv in lydgat’s manner 
tone, correspond with hi physiqu, which if he repel 
advanc in the first instanc seem to put persuas devic out 
question.

“what time ar you?” said the vicar, devour hi wound feel.

“after eleven,” said lydgat. and thei went into the draw-room.




chapter lxiv.

1_st gent_. where li the power, there let the blame lie too.

2_d gent_. nai, power is rel; you cannot 
    the come pest with border fortress,
    or catch your carp with subtl argument.
    all forc is twain in on: caus is not 
    unless effect be there; and action’s 
    must need contain a passiv. so 
    exist but with obedi.


even if lydgat had been inclin to be quit open about hi affair,
he knew that it would have hardli been in mr. farebroth’s power 
give him the help he immedi want. with the year’s bill 
in from hi tradesmen, with dover’s threaten hold on hi furnitur,
and with noth to depend on but slow dribbl payment from 
who must not be offend—for the handsom fee he had had from 
hall and lowick manor had been easili absorb—noth less than 
thousand pound would have freed him from actual embarrass, 
left a residu which, accord to the favorit phrase of 
in such circumst, would have given him “time to look about him.”

natur, the merri christma bring the happi new year, 
fellow-citizen expect to be paid for the troubl and good thei 
smilingli bestow on their neighbor, had so tighten the pressur 
sordid care on lydgat’s mind that it wa hardli possibl for him 
think unbrokenli of ani other subject, even the most habitu 
solicit. he wa not an ill-temper man; hi intellectu activ,
the ardent kind of hi heart, as well as hi strong frame, 
alwai, under toler easi condit, have kept him abov the 
uncontrol suscept which make bad temper. but he wa now 
prei to that worst irrit which aris not simpli from annoy,
but from the second conscious underli those annoy, 
wast energi and a degrad preoccup, which wa the revers 
all hi former purpos. “_thi_ is what i am think of; and _that_
is what i might have been think of,” wa the bitter incess 
within him, make everi difficulti a doubl goad to impati.

some gentlemen have made an amaz figur in literatur by 
discont with the univers as a trap of dul into which 
great soul have fallen by mistak; but the sens of a stupend 
and an insignific world mai have it consol. lydgat’
discont wa much harder to bear: it wa the sens that there wa 
grand exist in thought and effect action ly around him, 
hi self wa be narrow into the miser isol of 
fear, and vulgar anxieti for event that might allai such fear. 
troubl will perhap appear miser sordid, and beneath 
attent of lofti person who can know noth of debt except on 
magnific scale. doubtless thei were sordid; and for the major,
who ar not lofti, there is no escap from sordid but by be 
from monei-crave, with all it base hope and temptat, 
watch for death, it hint request, it hors-dealer’s desir 
make bad work pass for good, it seek for function which ought to 
anoth’s, it compuls often to long for luck in the shape of a 
calam.

it wa becaus lydgat writh under the idea of get hi 
beneath thi vile yoke that he had fallen into a bitter moodi 
which wa continu widen rosamond’s alien from him. 
the first disclosur about the bill of sale, he had made mani 
to draw her into sympathi with him about possibl measur 
narrow their expens, and with the threaten approach 
christma hi proposit grew more and more definit. “we two can 
with onli on servant, and live on veri littl,” he said, “and i 
manag with on hors.” for lydgat, as we have seen, had begun 
reason, with a more distinct vision, about the expens of live, 
ani share of pride he had given to appear of that sort wa 
compar with the pride which made him revolt from exposur as 
debtor, or from ask men to help him with their monei.

“of cours you can dismiss the other two servant, if you like,” 
rosamond; “but i should have thought it would be veri injuri to 
posit for us to live in a poor wai. you must expect your practic 
be lower.”

“my dear rosamond, it is not a question of choic. we have begun 
expens. peacock, you know, live in a much smaller hous 
thi. it is my fault: i ought to have known better, and i deserv 
thrash—if there were anybodi who had a right to give it me—
bring you into the necess of live in a poorer wai than you 
been us to. but we marri becaus we love each other, i suppos.
and that mai help us to pull along till thing get better. come, dear,
put down that work and come to me.”

he wa realli in chill gloom about her at that moment, but he dread 
futur without affect, and wa determin to resist the oncom 
divis between them. rosamond obei him, and he took her on 
knee, but in her secret soul she wa utterli aloof from him. the 
thing saw onli that the world wa not order to her like, 
lydgat wa part of that world. but he held her waist with on hand 
laid the other gentli on both of her; for thi rather abrupt man 
much tender in hi manner toward women, seem to have 
present in hi imagin the weak of their frame and 
delic pois of their health both in bodi and mind. and he 
again to speak persuas.

“i find, now i look into thing a littl, rosi, that it is 
what an amount of monei slip awai in our housekeep. i suppos 
servant ar careless, and we have had a great mani peopl come. 
there must be mani in our rank who manag with much less: thei must 
with common thing, i suppos, and look after the scrap. it seem,
monei goe but a littl wai in these matter, for wrench ha 
as plain as possibl, and he ha a veri larg practic.”

“oh, if you think of live as the wrench do!” said rosamond, with 
littl turn of her neck. “but i have heard you express your disgust 
that wai of live.”

“ye, thei have bad tast in everyth—thei make economi look ugli. 
needn’t do that. i onli meant that thei avoid expens, although 
ha a capit practic.”

“why should not you have a good practic, tertiu? mr. peacock had. 
should be more care not to offend peopl, and you should send 
medicin as the other do. i am sure you began well, and you 
sever good hous. it cannot answer to be eccentr; you should 
what will be gener like,” said rosamond, in a decid littl 
of admonit.

lydgat’s anger rose: he wa prepar to be indulg toward 
weak, but not toward feminin dictat. the shallow of 
waternixi’s soul mai have a charm until she becom didact. but 
control himself, and onli said, with a touch of despot firm—

“what i am to do in my practic, rosi, it is for me to judg. that 
not the question between us. it is enough for you to know that 
incom is like to be a veri narrow on—hardli four hundr, 
less, for a long time to come, and we must try to re-arrang our 
in accord with that fact.”

rosamond wa silent for a moment or two, look befor her, and 
said, “my uncl bulstrod ought to allow you a salari for the time 
give to the hospit: it is not right that you should work 
noth.”

“it wa understood from the begin that my servic would 
gratuit. that, again, need not enter into our discuss. i 
point out what is the onli probabl,” said lydgat, impati.
then check himself, he went on more quietli—

“i think i see on resourc which would free us from a good deal of 
present difficulti. i hear that young ned plymdal is go to 
marri to miss sophi toller. thei ar rich, and it is not often that 
good hous is vacant in middlemarch. i feel sure that thei would 
glad to take thi hous from us with most of our furnitur, and 
would be will to pai handsom for the leas. i can emploi 
to speak to plymdal about it.”

rosamond left her husband’s knee and walk slowli to the other end 
the room; when she turn round and walk toward him it wa 
that the tear had come, and that she wa bite her under-lip 
clasp her hand to keep herself from cry. lydgat 
wretch—shaken with anger and yet feel that it would be unmanli 
vent the anger just now.

“i am veri sorri, rosamond; i know thi is pain.”

“i thought, at least, when i had born to send the plate back and 
that man take an inventori of the furnitur—i should have 
_that_ would suffic.”

“i explain it to you at the time, dear. that wa onli a secur 
behind that secur there is a debt. and that debt must be paid 
the next few month, els we shall have our furnitur sold. if 
plymdal will take our hous and most of our furnitur, we shall 
abl to pai that debt, and some other too, and we shall be quit of 
place too expens for us. we might take a smaller hous: trumbul, 
know, ha a veri decent on to let at thirti pound a-year, and thi 
nineti.” lydgat utter thi speech in the curt hammer wai 
which we usual try to nail down a vagu mind to imper fact.
tear roll silent down rosamond’s cheek; she just press 
handkerchief against them, and stood look at the larg vase on 
mantel-piec. it wa a moment of more intens bitter than she 
ever felt befor. at last she said, without hurri and with 
emphasi—

“i never could have believ that you would like to act in that wai.”

“like it?” burst out lydgat, rise from hi chair, thrust 
hand in hi pocket and stalk awai from the hearth; “it’s not 
question of like. of cours, i don’t like it; it’s the onli thing 
can do.” he wheel round there, and turn toward her.

“i should have thought there were mani other mean than that,” 
rosamond. “let us have a sale and leav middlemarch altogeth.”

“to do what? what is the us of my leav my work in middlemarch to 
where i have none? we should be just as penniless elsewher as we 
here,” said lydgat still more angrili.

“if we ar to be in that posit it will be entir your own do,
tertiu,” said rosamond, turn round to speak with the 
convict. “you will not behav as you ought to do to your own famili.
you offend captain lydgat. sir godwin wa veri kind to me when 
were at quallingham, and i am sure if you show proper regard to 
and told him your affair, he would do anyth for you. but 
than that, you like give up our hous and furnitur to mr. 
plymdal.”

there wa someth like fierc in lydgat’s ey, as he 
with new violenc, “well, then, if you will have it so, i do like it. 
admit that i like it better than make a fool of myself by go 
beg where it’s of no us. understand then, that it is what i _like 
do._”

there wa a tone in the last sentenc which wa equival to 
clutch of hi strong hand on rosamond’s delic arm. but for all that,
hi will wa not a whit stronger than her. she immedi walk 
of the room in silenc, but with an intens determin to 
what lydgat like to do.

he went out of the hous, but as hi blood cool he felt that 
chief result of the discuss wa a deposit of dread within him at 
idea of open with hi wife in futur subject which might again 
him to violent speech. it wa as if a fractur in delic crystal 
begun, and he wa afraid of ani movement that might make it fatal. 
marriag would be a mere piec of bitter ironi if thei could not go 
love each other. he had long ago made up hi mind to what he 
wa her neg charact—her want of sensibl, which show 
in disregard both of hi specif wish and of hi gener aim. 
first great disappoint had been born: the tender devoted 
docil ador of the ideal wife must be renounc, and life must 
taken up on a lower stage of expect, as it is by men who have 
their limb. but the real wife had not onli her claim, she had still 
hold on hi heart, and it wa hi intens desir that the hold 
remain strong. in marriag, the certainti, “she will never love 
much,” is easier to bear than the fear, “i shall love her no more.”
henc, after that outburst, hi inward effort wa entir to 
her, and to blame the hard circumst which were partli hi fault.
he tri that even, by pet her, to heal the wound he had made 
the morn, and it wa not in rosamond’s natur to be repel 
sulki; inde, she welcom the sign that her husband love her 
wa under control. but thi wa someth quit distinct from 
_him_. lydgat would not have chosen soon to recur to the plan 
part with the hous; he wa resolv to carri it out, and sai 
littl more about it as possibl. but rosamond herself touch on it 
breakfast by sai, mildli—

“have you spoken to trumbul yet?”

“no,” said lydgat, “but i shall call on him as i go by thi morn.
no time must be lost.” he took rosamond’s question as a sign that 
withdrew her inward opposit, and kiss her head caressingli when 
got up to go awai.

as soon as it wa late enough to make a call, rosamond went to mr.
plymdal, mr. ned’s mother, and enter with pretti 
into the subject of the come marriag. mr. plymdal’s matern 
wa, that rosamond might possibl now have retrospect glimps 
her own folli; and feel the advantag to be at present all on 
side of her son, wa too kind a woman not to behav gracious.

“ye, ned is most happi, i must sai. and sophi toller is all i 
desir in a daughter-in-law. of cours her father is abl to 
someth handsom for her—that is onli what would be expect with 
breweri like hi. and the connect is everyth we should desir.
but that is not what i look at. she is such a veri nice girl—no air,
no pretens, though on a level with the first. i don’t mean with 
titl aristocraci. i see veri littl good in peopl aim out 
their own sphere. i mean that sophi is equal to the best in the town,
and she is content with that.”

“i have alwai thought her veri agreeabl,” said rosamond.

“i look upon it as a reward for ned, who never held hi head too high,
that he should have got into the veri best connect,” continu mr.
plymdal, her nativ sharp soften by a fervid sens that she 
take a correct view. “and such particular peopl as the toller ar,
thei might have object becaus some of our friend ar not their. 
is well known that your aunt bulstrod and i have been intim 
our youth, and mr. plymdal ha been alwai on mr. bulstrod’s side.
and i myself prefer seriou opinion. but the toller have welcom 
all the same.”

“i am sure he is a veri deserv, well-principl young man,” 
rosamond, with a neat air of patronag in return for mr. plymdal’
wholesom correct.

“oh, he ha not the style of a captain in the armi, or that sort 
carriag as if everybodi wa beneath him, or that showi kind 
talk, and sing, and intellectu talent. but i am thank he 
not. it is a poor prepar both for here and hereaft.”

“oh dear, ye; appear have veri littl to do with happi,” 
rosamond. “i think there is everi prospect of their be a 
coupl. what hous will thei take?”

“oh, as for that, thei must put up with what thei can get. thei 
been look at the hous in st. peter’s place, next to mr. hackbutt’s;
it belong to him, and he is put it nice in repair. i 
thei ar not like to hear of a better. inde, i think ned 
decid the matter to-dai.”

“i should think it is a nice hous; i like st. peter’s place.”

“well, it is near the church, and a genteel situat. but the 
ar narrow, and it is all up and down. you don’t happen to know 
ani other that would be at liberti?” said mr. plymdal, fix 
round black ey on rosamond with the anim of a sudden thought 
them.

“oh no; i hear so littl of those thing.”

rosamond had not foreseen that question and answer in set out 
pai her visit; she had simpli meant to gather ani inform 
would help her to avert the part with her own hous 
circumst thoroughli disagre to her. as to the untruth in 
repli, she no more reflect on it than she did on the untruth 
wa in her sai that appear had veri littl to do 
happi. her object, she wa convinc, wa thoroughli justifi:
it wa lydgat whose intent wa inexcus; and there wa a plan 
her mind which, when she had carri it out fulli, would prove how 
fals a step it would have been for him to have descend from 
posit.

she return home by mr. borthrop trumbul’s offic, mean to 
there. it wa the first time in her life that rosamond had thought 
do anyth in the form of busi, but she felt equal to 
occas. that she should be oblig to do what she intens dislik,
wa an idea which turn her quiet tenac into activ invent. 
wa a case in which it could not be enough simpli to disobei and 
seren, placidli obstin: she must act accord to her judgment,
and she said to herself that her judgment wa right—“inde, if it 
not been, she would not have wish to act on it.”

mr. trumbul wa in the back-room of hi offic, and receiv 
with hi finest manner, not onli becaus he had much sensibl 
her charm, but becaus the good-natur fibr in him wa stir 
hi certainti that lydgat wa in difficulti, and that 
uncommonli pretti woman—thi young ladi with the highest 
attract—wa like to feel the pinch of troubl—to find 
involv in circumst beyond her control. he beg her to do 
the honor to take a seat, and stood befor her trim and 
himself with an eager solicitud, which wa chiefli benevol.
rosamond’s first question wa, whether her husband had call on mr.
trumbul that morn, to speak about dispos of their hous.

“ye, ma’am, ye, he did; he did so,” said the good auction, 
to throw someth sooth into hi iter. “i wa about to 
hi order, if possibl, thi afternoon. he wish me not 
procrastin.”

“i call to tell you not to go ani further, mr. trumbul; and i beg 
you not to mention what ha been said on the subject. will you 
me?”

“certainli i will, mr. lydgat, certainli. confid is sacr 
me on busi or ani other topic. i am then to consid the 
withdrawn?” said mr. trumbul, adjust the long end of hi 
cravat with both hand, and look at rosamond deferenti.

“ye, if you pleas. i find that mr. ned plymdal ha taken a hous—
on in st. peter’s place next to mr. hackbutt’s. mr. lydgat would 
annoi that hi order should be fulfil uselessli. and 
that, there ar other circumst which render the 
unnecessari.”

“veri good, mr. lydgat, veri good. i am at your command, 
you requir ani servic of me,” said mr. trumbul, who felt pleasur 
conjectur that some new resourc had been open. “reli on me, 
beg. the affair shall go no further.”

that even lydgat wa a littl comfort by observ that 
wa more live than she had usual been of late, and even 
interest in do what would pleas him without be ask. 
thought, “if she will be happi and i can rub through, what doe it 
signifi? it is onli a narrow swamp that we have to pass in a 
journei. if i can get my mind clear again, i shall do.”

he wa so much cheer that he began to search for an account 
experi which he had long ago meant to look up, and had 
out of that creep self-despair which come in the train of 
anxieti. he felt again some of the old delight absorpt in 
far-reach inquiri, while rosamond plai the quiet music which 
as help to hi medit as the plash of an oar on the 
lake. it wa rather late; he had push awai all the book, and 
look at the fire with hi hand clasp behind hi head 
forget of everyth except the construct of a 
control experi, when rosamond, who had left the piano and 
lean back in her chair watch him, said—

“mr. ned plymdal ha taken a hous alreadi.”

lydgat, startl and jar, look up in silenc for a moment, like 
man who ha been disturb in hi sleep. then flush with 
unpleas conscious, he ask—

“how do you know?”

“i call at mr. plymdal’s thi morn, and she told me that he 
taken the hous in st. peter’s place, next to mr. hackbutt’s.”

lydgat wa silent. he drew hi hand from behind hi head and 
them against the hair which wa hang, as it wa apt to do, in a 
on hi forehead, while he rest hi elbow on hi knee. he 
feel bitter disappoint, as if he had open a door out of 
suffoc place and had found it wall up; but he also felt 
that rosamond wa pleas with the caus of hi disappoint. 
prefer not look at her and not speak, until he had got 
the first spasm of vexat. after all, he said in hi bitter, 
can a woman care about so much as hous and furnitur? a 
without them is an absurd. when he look up and push hi 
asid, hi dark ey had a miser blank non-expect of 
in them, but he onli said, coolli—

“perhap some on els mai turn up. i told trumbul to be on 
look-out if he fail with plymdal.”

rosamond made no remark. she trust to the chanc that noth 
would pass between her husband and the auction until some 
should have justifi her interfer; at ani rate, she had 
the event which she immedi dread. after a paus, she said—

“how much monei is it that those disagre peopl want?”

“what disagre peopl?”

“those who took the list—and the other. i mean, how much monei 
satisfi them so that you need not be troubl ani more?”

lydgat survei her for a moment, as if he were look for symptom,
and then said, “oh, if i could have got six hundr from plymdal 
furnitur and as premium, i might have manag. i could have paid 
dover, and given enough on account to the other to make them 
patient, if we contract our expens.”

“but i mean how much should you want if we stai in thi hous?”

“more than i am like to get anywher,” said lydgat, with rather 
grate sarcasm in hi tone. it anger him to perceiv that rosamond’
mind wa wander over impractic wish instead of face 
effort.

“why should you not mention the sum?” said rosamond, with a 
indic that she did not like hi manner.

“well,” said lydgat in a guess tone, “it would take at least 
thousand to set me at eas. but,” he ad, incis, “i have 
consid what i shall do without it, not with it.”

rosamond said no more.

but the next dai she carri out her plan of write to sir 
lydgat. sinc the captain’s visit, she had receiv a letter from him,
and also on from mr. mengan, hi marri sister, condol with 
on the loss of her babi, and express vagu the hope that 
should see her again at quallingham. lydgat had told her that 
polit meant noth; but she wa secretli convinc that 
backward in lydgat’s famili toward him wa due to hi cold 
contemptu behavior, and she had answer the letter in her 
charm manner, feel some confid that a specif 
would follow. but there had been total silenc. the captain 
wa not a great penman, and rosamond reflect that the sister 
have been abroad. howev, the season wa come for think of 
at home, and at ani rate sir godwin, who had chuck her under 
chin, and pronounc her to be like the celebr beauti, mr. croli,
who had made a conquest of him in 1790, would be touch by ani 
from her, and would find it pleasant for her sake to behav as he 
to do toward hi nephew. rosamond wa naiv convinc of what an 
gentleman ought to do to prevent her from suffer annoy. and 
wrote what she consid the most judici letter possibl—on 
would strike sir godwin as a proof of her excel sens—point 
how desir it wa that tertiu should quit such a place 
middlemarch for on more fit to hi talent, how the 
charact of the inhabit had hinder hi profession success, 
how in consequ he wa in monei difficulti, from which it 
requir a thousand pound thoroughli to extric him. she did not 
that tertiu wa unawar of her intent to write; for she had 
idea that hi suppos sanction of her letter would be in 
with what she did sai of hi great regard for hi uncl godwin as 
rel who had alwai been hi best friend. such wa the forc 
poor rosamond’s tactic now she appli them to affair.

thi had happen befor the parti on new year’s dai, and no answer 
yet come from sir godwin. but on the morn of that dai lydgat had 
learn that rosamond had revok hi order to borthrop trumbul. 
it necessari that she should be gradual accustom to the idea 
their quit the hous in lowick gate, he overcam hi reluct 
speak to her again on the subject, and when thei were 
said—

“i shall try to see trumbul thi morn, and tell him to 
the hous in the ‘pioneer’ and the ‘trumpet.’ if the thing 
advertis, some on might be inclin to take it who would 
otherwis have thought of a chang. in these countri place mani 
go on in their old hous when their famili ar too larg for them,
for want of know where thei can find anoth. and trumbul seem 
have got no bite at all.”

rosamond knew that the inevit moment wa come. “i order 
not to inquir further,” she said, with a care calm which 
evid defens.

lydgat stare at her in mute amaz. onli half an hour befor 
had been fasten up her plait for her, and talk the “
languag” of affect, which rosamond, though not return it,
accept as if she had been a seren and love imag, now and 
miracul dimpl toward her votari. with such fibr still 
in him, the shock he receiv could not at onc be distinctli anger; 
wa confus pain. he laid down the knife and fork with which he 
carv, and throw himself back in hi chair, said at last, with 
cool ironi in hi tone—

“mai i ask when and why you did so?”

“when i knew that the plymdal had taken a hous, i call to tell 
not to mention our to them; and at the same time i told him not to 
the affair go on ani further. i knew that it would be veri injuri 
you if it were known that you wish to part with your hous 
furnitur, and i had a veri strong object to it. i think that 
reason enough.”

“it wa of no consequ then that i had told you imper 
of anoth kind; of no consequ that i had come to a 
conclus, and given an order accordingli?” said lydgat, bitingli,
the thunder and lightn gather about hi brow and ey.

the effect of ani on’s anger on rosamond had alwai been to make 
shrink in cold dislik, and to becom all the more calmli correct, 
the convict that she wa not the person to misbehav whatev 
might do. she repli—

“i think i had a perfect right to speak on a subject which concern 
at least as much as you.”

“clearli—you had a right to speak, but onli to me. you had no right 
contradict my order secretli, and treat me as if i were a fool,” 
lydgat, in the same tone as befor. then with some ad scorn, “is 
possibl to make you understand what the consequ will be? is it 
ani us for me to tell you again why we must try to part with 
hous?”

“it is not necessari for you to tell me again,” said rosamond, in 
voic that fell and trickl like cold water-drop. “i rememb 
you said. you spoke just as violent as you do now. but that doe 
alter my opinion that you ought to try everi other mean rather 
take a step which is so pain to me. and as to advertis the hous,
i think it would be perfectli degrad to you.”

“and suppos i disregard your opinion as you disregard mine?”

“you can do so, of cours. but i think you ought to have told me 
we were marri that you would place me in the worst posit, 
than give up your own will.”

lydgat did not speak, but toss hi head on on side, and 
the corner of hi mouth in despair. rosamond, see that he wa 
look at her, rose and set hi cup of coffe befor him; but he 
no notic of it, and went on with an inward drama and argument,
occasion move in hi seat, rest on arm on the tabl, 
rub hi hand against hi hair. there wa a conflux of emot 
thought in him that would not let him either give thorough wai to 
anger or persever with simpl rigid of resolv. rosamond 
advantag of hi silenc.

“when we were marri everyon felt that your posit wa veri high. 
could not have imagin then that you would want to sell our furnitur,
and take a hous in bride street, where the room ar like cage. if 
ar to live in that wai let us at least leav middlemarch.”

“these would be veri strong consider,” said lydgat, 
iron—still there wa a wither pale about hi lip as 
look at hi coffe, and did not drink—“these would be veri 
consider if i did not happen to be in debt.”

“mani person must have been in debt in the same wai, but if thei 
respect, peopl trust them. i am sure i have heard papa sai 
the torbit were in debt, and thei went on veri well. it cannot be 
to act rashli,” said rosamond, with seren wisdom.

lydgat sat paralyz by oppos impuls: sinc no reason he 
appli to rosamond seem like to conquer her assent, he want 
smash and grind some object on which he could at least produc 
impress, or els to tell her brutal that he wa master, and 
must obei. but he not onli dread the effect of such extrem 
their mutual life—he had a grow dread of rosamond’s quiet 
obstinaci, which would not allow ani assert of power to be final;
and again, she had touch him in a spot of keenest feel by 
that she had been delud with a fals vision of happi in 
him. as to sai that he wa master, it wa not the fact. the 
resolut to which he had wrought himself by dint of logic 
honor pride wa begin to relax under her torpedo contact. 
swallow half hi cup of coffe, and then rose to go.

“i mai at least request that you will not go to trumbul 
present—until it ha been seen that there ar no other mean,” 
rosamond. although she wa not subject to much fear, she felt it 
not to betrai that she had written to sir godwin. “promis me that 
will not go to him for a few week, or without tell me.”

lydgat gave a short laugh. “i think it is i who should exact a 
that you will do noth without tell me,” he said, turn hi 
sharpli upon her, and then move to the door.

“you rememb that we ar go to dine at papa’s,” said rosamond,
wish that he should turn and make a more thorough concess to her.
but he onli said “oh ye,” impati, and went awai. she held it 
be veri odiou in him that he did not think the pain proposit 
had had to make to her were enough, without show so unpleas 
temper. and when she put the moder request that he would defer 
to trumbul again, it wa cruel in him not to assur her of what 
meant to do. she wa convinc of her have act in everi wai for 
best; and each grate or angri speech of lydgat’s serv onli as 
addit to the regist of offenc in her mind. poor rosamond 
month had begun to associ her husband with feel 
disappoint, and the terribl inflex relat of marriag 
lost it charm of encourag delight dream. it had freed her 
the disagre of her father’s hous, but it had not given 
everyth that she had wish and hope. the lydgat with whom she 
been in love had been a group of airi condit for her, most of 
had disappear, while their place had been taken by everi-dai 
which must be live through slowli from hour to hour, not 
through with a rapid select of favor aspect. the habit 
lydgat’s profess, hi home preoccup with scientif subject,
which seem to her almost like a morbid vampir’s tast, hi 
view of thing which had never enter into the dialogu 
courtship—all these continu alien influenc, even without 
fact of hi have place himself at a disadvantag in the town, 
without that first shock of revel about dover’s debt, would 
made hi presenc dull to her. there wa anoth presenc which 
sinc the earli dai of her marriag, until four month ago, had 
an agreeabl excit, but that wa gone: rosamond would not 
to herself how much the consequ blank had to do with her 
ennui; and it seem to her (perhap she wa right) that an 
to quallingham, and an open for lydgat to settl elsewher than 
middlemarch—in london, or somewher like to be free 
unpleas—would satisfi her quit well, and make her 
to the absenc of will ladislaw, toward whom she felt some 
for hi exalt of mr. casaubon.

that wa the state of thing with lydgat and rosamond on the 
year’s dai when thei dine at her father’s, she look mildli 
toward him in remembr of hi ill-temper behavior at breakfast,
and he carri a much deeper effect from the inward conflict in 
that morn scene wa onli on of mani epoch. hi flush 
while talk to mr. farebroth—hi effort after the cynic 
that all wai of get monei ar essenti the same, and 
chanc ha an empir which reduc choic to a fool’s illus—wa 
the symptom of a waver resolv, a benumb respons to the 
stimuli of enthusiasm.

what wa he to do? he saw even more keenli than rosamond did 
dreari of take her into the small hous in bride street, 
she would have scanti furnitur around her and discont within: 
life of privat and life with rosamond were two imag which 
becom more and more irreconcil ever sinc the threat of 
had disclos itself. but even if hi resolv had forc the 
imag into combin, the us preliminari to that hard 
were not visibl within reach. and though he had not given the 
which hi wife had ask for, he did not go again to trumbul. he 
began to think of take a rapid journei to the north and see 
godwin. he had onc believ that noth would urg him into make 
applic for monei to hi uncl, but he had not then known the 
pressur of altern yet more disagre. he could not depend 
the effect of a letter; it wa onli in an interview, 
disagre thi might be to himself, that he could give a 
explan and could test the effect of kinship. no sooner 
lydgat begun to repres thi step to himself as the easiest 
there wa a reaction of anger that he—he who had long ago determin 
live aloof from such abject calcul, such self-interest 
about the inclin and the pocket of men with whom he had 
proud to have no aim in common—should have fallen not simpli to 
level, but to the level of solicit them.




chapter lxv.

on of us two must bowen douteless,
and, sith a man is more 
than woman is, ye [men] most be suffrabl.
—chaucer: _canterburi tale_.


the bia of human natur to be slow in correspond triumph 
over the present quicken in the gener pace of thing: what 
then that in 1832 old sir godwin lydgat wa slow to write a 
which wa of consequ to other rather than to himself? nearli 
week of the new year were gone, and rosamond, await an answer 
her win appeal, wa everi dai disappoint. lydgat, in 
ignor of her expect, wa see the bill come in, 
feel that dover’s us of hi advantag over other creditor 
immin. he had never mention to rosamond hi brood purpos 
go to quallingham: he did not want to admit what would appear to 
a concess to her wish after indign refus, until the 
moment; but he wa realli expect to set off soon. a slice of 
railwai would enabl him to manag the whole journei and back in 
dai.

but on morn after lydgat had gone out, a letter came address 
him, which rosamond saw clearli to be from sir godwin. she wa full 
hope. perhap there might be a particular note to her enclos; 
lydgat wa natur address on the question of monei or other aid,
and the fact that he wa written to, nai, the veri delai in write 
all, seem to certifi that the answer wa thoroughli compliant. 
wa too much excit by these thought to do anyth but 
stitch in a warm corner of the dine-room, with the outsid of 
moment letter ly on the tabl befor her. about twelv she 
her husband’s step in the passag, and trip to open the door, 
said in her lightest tone, “tertiu, come in here—here is a letter 
you.”

“ah?” he said, not take off hi hat, but just turn her 
within hi arm to walk toward the spot where the letter lai. “my 
godwin!” he exclaim, while rosamond reseat herself, and watch 
as he open the letter. she had expect him to be surpris.

while lydgat’s ey glanc rapidli over the brief letter, she saw 
face, usual of a pale brown, take on a dry white; with 
and lip quiver he toss down the letter befor her, and 
violent—

“it will be imposs to endur life with you, if you will alwai 
act secretli—act in opposit to me and hide your action.”

he check hi speech and turn hi back on her—then wheel round 
walk about, sat down, and got up again restlessli, grasp hard 
object deep down in hi pocket. he wa afraid of sai 
irremedi cruel.

rosamond too had chang color as she read. the letter ran in 
wai:—

“dear tertiu,—don’t set your wife to write to me when you 
anyth to ask. it is a roundabout wheedl sort of thing which 
should not have credit you with. i never choos to write to a 
on matter of busi. as to my suppli you with a thousand pound,
or onli half that sum, i can do noth of the sort. my own 
drain me to the last penni. with two younger son and three daughter,
i am not like to have cash to spare. you seem to have got 
your own monei pretti quickli, and to have made a mess where you ar;
the sooner you go somewher els the better. but i have noth to 
with men of your profess, and can’t help you there. i did the best 
could for you as guardian, and let you have your own wai in take 
medicin. you might have gone into the armi or the church. your 
would have held out for that, and there would have been a surer 
befor you. your uncl charl ha had a grudg against you for 
go into hi profess, but not i. i have alwai wish you well,
but you must consid yourself on your own leg entir now.


your affection uncl,
godwin lydgat.”


when rosamond had finish read the letter she sat quit still, 
her hand fold befor her, restrain ani show of her 
disappoint, and intrench herself in quiet passiv under 
husband’s wrath. lydgat paus in hi movement, look at her again,
and said, with bite sever—

“will thi be enough to convinc you of the harm you mai do by 
meddl? have you sens enough to recogn now your incompet 
judg and act for me—to interfer with your ignor in affair 
it belong to me to decid on?”

the word were hard; but thi wa not the first time that lydgat 
been frustrat by her. she did not look at him, and made no repli.

“i had nearli resolv on go to quallingham. it would have cost 
pain enough to do it, yet it might have been of some us. but it 
been of no us for me to think of anyth. you have alwai 
counteract me secretli. you delud me with a fals assent, and 
i am at the merci of your devic. if you mean to resist everi wish 
express, sai so and defi me. i shall at least know what i am 
then.”

it is a terribl moment in young live when the close of love’
bond ha turn to thi power of gall. in spite of rosamond’
self-control a tear fell silent and roll over her lip. she 
said noth; but under that quietud wa hidden an intens effect: 
wa in such entir disgust with her husband that she wish she 
never seen him. sir godwin’s rude toward her and utter want 
feel rang him with dover and all other creditor—
peopl who onli thought of themselv, and did not mind how 
thei were to her. even her father wa unkind, and might have done 
for them. in fact there wa but on person in rosamond’s world whom 
did not regard as blameworthi, and that wa the grace creatur 
blond plait and with littl hand cross befor her, who had 
express herself unbecomingli, and had alwai act for the best—
best natur be what she best like.

lydgat paus and look at her began to feel that half-
sens of helpless which come over passion peopl when 
passion is met by an innoc-look silenc whose meek victim 
seem to put them in the wrong, and at last infect even the 
indign with a doubt of it justic. he need to recov the 
sens that he wa in the right by moder hi word.

“can you not see, rosamond,” he began again, try to be simpli 
and not bitter, “that noth can be so fatal as a want of open 
confid between us? it ha happen again and again that i 
express a decid wish, and you have seem to assent, yet after 
you have secretli disobei my wish. in that wai i can never know 
i have to trust to. there would be some hope for us if you would 
thi. am i such an unreason, furiou brute? why should you not 
open with me?” still silenc.

“will you onli sai that you have been mistaken, and that i mai 
on your not act secretli in futur?” said lydgat, urgent, 
with someth of request in hi tone which rosamond wa quick 
perceiv. she spoke with cool.

“i cannot possibl make admiss or promis in answer to such 
as you have us toward me. i have not been accustom to languag 
that kind. you have spoken of my ‘secret meddl,’ and my ‘
ignor,’ and my ‘fals assent.’ i have never express myself 
that wai to you, and i think that you ought to apolog. you spoke 
it be imposs to live with me. certainli you have not made 
life pleasant to me of late. i think it wa to be expect that 
should try to avert some of the hardship which our marriag 
brought on me.” anoth tear fell as rosamond ceas speak, and 
press it awai as quietli as the first.

lydgat flung himself into a chair, feel checkmat. what place 
there in her mind for a remonstr to lodg in? he laid down hi hat,
flung an arm over the back of hi chair, and look down for 
moment without speak. rosamond had the doubl purchas over him 
insens to the point of justic in hi reproach, and 
sensibl to the undeni hardship now present in her 
life. although her duplic in the affair of the hous had 
what he knew, and had realli hinder the plymdal from know of it,
she had no conscious that her action could rightli be call fals.
we ar not oblig to identifi our own act accord to a 
classif, ani more than the materi of our groceri and cloth.
rosamond felt that she wa aggriev, and that thi wa what 
had to recogn.

as for him, the need of accommod himself to her natur, which 
inflex in proport to it negat, held him as with pincer. 
had begun to have an alarm foresight of her irrevoc loss of 
for him, and the consequ dreari of their life. the readi 
of hi emot made thi dread altern quickli with the 
violent movement of hi anger. it would assuredli have been a 
boast in him to sai that he wa her master.

“you have not made my life pleasant to me of late”—“the hardship 
our marriag ha brought on me”—these word were sting 
imagin as a pain make an exagger dream. if he were not 
to sink from hi highest resolv, but to sink into the 
fetter of domest hate?

“rosamond,” he said, turn hi ey on her with a melancholi look,
“you should allow for a man’s word when he is disappoint 
provok. you and i cannot have opposit interest. i cannot part 
happi from your. if i am angri with you, it is that you seem 
to see how ani conceal divid us. how could i wish to 
anyth hard to you either by my word or conduct? when i hurt you, 
hurt part of my own life. i should never be angri with you if you 
be quit open with me.”

“i have onli wish to prevent you from hurri us into 
without ani necess,” said rosamond, the tear come again from 
soften feel now that her husband had soften. “it is so veri 
to be disgrac here among all the peopl we know, and to live in 
a miser wai. i wish i had di with the babi.”

she spoke and wept with that gentl which make such word 
tear omnipot over a love-heart man. lydgat drew hi chair 
to her and press her delic head against hi cheek with 
power tender hand. he onli caress her; he did not sai anyth;
for what wa there to sai? he could not promis to shield her from 
dread wretched, for he could see no sure mean of do so. 
he left her to go out again, he told himself that it wa ten 
harder for her than for him: he had a life awai from home, and 
appeal to hi activ on behalf of other. he wish to 
everyth in her if he could—but it wa inevit that in 
excus mood he should think of her as if she were an anim 
anoth and feebler speci. nevertheless she had master him.




chapter lxvi.

’ti on thing to be tempt, escalu,
anoth thing to fall.
—_measur for measur_.


lydgat certainli had good reason to reflect on the servic 
practic did him in counteract hi person care. he had no 
free energi enough for spontan research and specul think,
but by the bedsid of patient, the direct extern call on 
judgment and sympathi brought the ad impuls need to draw 
out of himself. it wa not simpli that benefic har of 
which enabl silli men to live respect and unhappi men to 
calmli—it wa a perpetu claim on the immedi fresh applic 
thought, and on the consider of anoth’s need and trial. mani 
us look back through life would sai that the kindest man we 
ever known ha been a medic man, or perhap that surgeon whose 
tact, direct by deepli inform percept, ha come to us in 
need with a more sublim benefic than that of miracl-worker. 
of that twice-bless merci wa alwai with lydgat in hi work at 
hospit or in privat hous, serv better than ani opiat to 
and sustain him under hi anxieti and hi sens of mental degeneraci.

mr. farebroth’s suspicion as to the opiat wa true, howev. 
the first gall pressur of foreseen difficulti, and the 
percept that hi marriag, if it were not to be a yoke loneli,
must be a state of effort to go on love without too much care 
be love, he had onc or twice tri a dose of opium. but he had 
hereditari constitut crave after such transient escap from 
haunt of miseri. he wa strong, could drink a great deal of wine,
but did not care about it; and when the men round him were 
spirit, he took sugar and water, have a contemptu piti even 
the earliest stage of excit from drink. it wa the same 
gambl. he had look on at a great deal of gambl in pari,
watch it as if it had been a diseas. he wa no more tempt by 
win than he wa by drink. he had said to himself that the 
win he care for must be attain by a consciou process of high,
difficult combin tend toward a benefic result. the power 
long for could not be repres by agit finger clutch 
heap of coin, or by the half-barbar, half-idiot triumph in 
ey of a man who sweep within hi arm the ventur of 
chapfallen companion.

but just as he had tri opium, so hi thought now began to turn 
gambl—not with appetit for it excit, but with a sort 
wist inward gaze after that easi wai of get monei, which 
no ask and brought no respons. if he had been in london 
pari at that time, it is probabl that such thought, second 
opportun, would have taken him into a gambl-hous, no longer 
watch the gambler, but to watch with them in kindr eager.
repugn would have been surmount by the immens need to win, 
chanc would be kind enough to let him. an incid which happen 
veri long after that airi notion of get aid from hi uncl had 
exclud, wa a strong sign of the effect that might have follow 
extant opportun of gambl.

the billiard-room at the green dragon wa the constant resort of 
certain set, most of whom, like our acquaint mr. bambridg, 
regard as men of pleasur. it wa here that poor fred vinci had 
part of hi memor debt, have lost monei in bet, and 
oblig to borrow of that gai companion. it wa gener known 
middlemarch that a good deal of monei wa lost and won in thi wai; 
the consequ reput of the green dragon as a place of 
natur heighten in some quarter the temptat to go there.
probabl it regular visit, like the initi of freemasonri,
wish that there were someth a littl more tremend to keep 
themselv concern it; but thei were not a close commun, 
mani decent senior as well as junior occasion turn into 
billiard-room to see what wa go on. lydgat, who had the 
aptitud for billiard, and wa fond of the game, had onc or twice 
the earli dai after hi arriv in middlemarch taken hi turn with 
cue at the green dragon; but afterward he had no leisur for the game,
and no inclin for the social there. on even, howev, 
had occas to seek mr. bambridg at that resort. the horsedeal 
engag to get him a custom for hi remain good hors, for 
lydgat had determin to substitut a cheap hack, hope by 
reduct of style to get perhap twenti pound; and he care now 
everi small sum, as a help toward feed the patienc of 
tradesmen. to run up to the billiard-room, as he wa pass, 
save time.

mr. bambridg wa not yet come, but would be sure to arriv by-and-by,
said hi friend mr. horrock; and lydgat stai, plai a game for 
sake of pass the time. that even he had the peculiar light in 
ey and the unusu vivac which had been onc notic in him by mr.
farebroth. the except fact of hi presenc wa much notic 
the room, where there wa a good deal of middlemarch compani; 
sever looker-on, as well as some of the player, were bet 
anim. lydgat wa plai well, and felt confid; the bet 
drop round him, and with a swift glanc thought of the 
gain which might doubl the sum he wa save from hi hors, he 
to bet on hi own plai, and won again and again. mr. bambridg had 
in, but lydgat did not notic him. he wa not onli excit with 
plai, but vision were gleam on him of go the next dai 
brass, where there wa gambl on a grander scale to be had, 
where, by on power snatch at the devil’s bait, he might carri 
off without the hook, and bui hi rescu from hi daili solicit.

he wa still win when two new visitor enter. on of them wa 
young hawlei, just come from hi law studi in town, and the other 
fred vinci, who had spent sever even of late at thi old haunt 
hi. young hawlei, an accomplish billiard-player, brought a 
fresh hand to the cue. but fred vinci, startl at see lydgat, 
astonish to see him bet with an excit air, stood asid, 
kept out of the circl round the tabl.

fred had been reward resolut by a littl laxiti of late. he 
been work heartili for six month at all outdoor occup 
mr. garth, and by dint of sever practic had nearli master 
defect of hi handwrit, thi practic be, perhap, a littl 
less sever that it wa often carri on in the even at mr. garth’
under the ey of mari. but the last fortnight mari had been stai 
lowick parsonag with the ladi there, dure mr. farebroth’
resid in middlemarch, where he wa carri out some 
plan; and fred, not see anyth more agreeabl to do, had 
into the green dragon, partli to plai at billiard, partli to tast 
old flavor of discours about hors, sport, and thing in gener,
consid from a point of view which wa not strenuous correct. 
had not been out hunt onc thi season, had had no hors of hi 
to ride, and had gone from place to place chiefli with mr. garth in 
gig, or on the sober cob which mr. garth could lend him. it wa 
littl too bad, fred began to think, that he should be kept in 
trace with more sever than if he had been a clergyman. “i will 
you what, mistress mari—it will be rather harder work to 
survei and draw plan than it would have been to write sermon,”
he had said, wish her to appreci what he went through for 
sake; “and as to hercul and theseu, thei were noth to me. 
had sport, and never learn to write a bookkeep hand.” and now,
mari be out of the wai for a littl while, fred, like ani 
strong dog who cannot slip hi collar, had pull up the stapl of 
chain and made a small escap, not of cours mean to go fast or far.
there could be no reason why he should not plai at billiard, but 
wa determin not to bet. as to monei just now, fred had in hi 
the heroic project of save almost all of the eighti pound that mr.
garth offer him, and return it, which he could easili do by 
up all futil monei-spend, sinc he had a superflu stock 
cloth, and no expens in hi board. in that wai he could, in 
year, go a good wai toward repai the nineti pound of which he 
depriv mr. garth, unhappili at a time when she need that sum 
than she did now. nevertheless, it must be acknowledg that on 
even, which wa the fifth of hi recent visit to the billiard-room,
fred had, not in hi pocket, but in hi mind, the ten pound which 
meant to reserv for himself from hi half-year’s salari (have 
him the pleasur of carri thirti to mr. garth when mari wa 
to be come home again)—he had those ten pound in hi mind as a 
from which he might risk someth, if there were a chanc of a 
bet. why? well, when sovereign were fly about, why shouldn’t 
catch a few? he would never go far along that road again; but a 
like to assur himself, and men of pleasur gener, what he 
do in the wai of mischief if he chose, and that if he abstain 
make himself ill, or beggar himself, or talk with the 
loos which the narrow limit of human capac will allow, it 
not becaus he is a spoonei. fred did not enter into formal reason,
which ar a veri artifici, inexact wai of repres the 
return of old habit, and the capric of young blood: but there 
lurk in him a prophet sens that even, that when he began 
plai he should also begin to bet—that he should enjoi 
punch-drink, and in gener prepar himself for feel “
seedi” in the morn. it is in such indefin movement that 
often begin.

but the last thing like to have enter fred’s expect wa 
he should see hi brother-in-law lydgat—of whom he had never 
drop the old opinion that he wa a prig, and tremend 
of hi superior—look excit and bet, just as he 
might have done. fred felt a shock greater than he could quit 
for by the vagu knowledg that lydgat wa in debt, and that 
father had refus to help him; and hi own inclin to enter 
the plai wa suddenli check. it wa a strang revers of attitud:
fred’s blond face and blue ey, usual bright and careless, readi 
give attent to anyth that held out a promis of amus,
look involuntarili grave and almost embarrass as if by the 
of someth unfit; while lydgat, who had habitu an air 
self-possess strength, and a certain medit that seem 
lie behind hi most observ attent, wa act, watch, 
with that excit narrow conscious which remind on of an 
with fierc ey and retractil claw.

lydgat, by bet on hi own stroke, had won sixteen pound; 
young hawlei’s arriv had chang the pois of thing. he 
first-rate stroke himself, and began to bet against lydgat’s stroke,
the strain of whose nerv wa thu chang from simpl confid 
hi own movement to defi anoth person’s doubt in them. 
defianc wa more excit than the confid, but it wa less sure.
he continu to bet on hi own plai, but began often to fail. still 
went on, for hi mind wa as utterli narrow into that 
crevic of plai as if he had been the most ignor lounger there. 
observ that lydgat wa lose fast, and found himself in the 
situat of puzzl hi brain to think of some devic by which,
without be offens, he could withdraw lydgat’s attent, 
perhap suggest to him a reason for quit the room. he saw 
other were observ lydgat’s strang unlik to himself, and 
occur to him that mere to touch hi elbow and call him asid for 
moment might rous him from hi absorpt. he could think of 
clever than the dare improb of sai that he want to 
rosi, and wish to know if she were at home thi even; and he 
go desper to carri out thi weak devic, when a waiter came 
to him with a messag, sai that mr. farebroth wa below, 
beg to speak with him.

fred wa surpris, not quit comfort, but send word that 
would be down immedi, he went with a new impuls up to lydgat,
said, “can i speak to you a moment?” and drew him asid.

“farebroth ha just sent up a messag to sai that he want to 
to me. he is below. i thought you might like to know he wa there, 
you had anyth to sai to him.”

fred had simpli snatch up thi pretext for speak, becaus he 
not sai, “you ar lose confoundedli, and ar make everybodi 
at you; you had better come awai.” but inspir could hardli 
serv him better. lydgat had not befor seen that fred wa present,
and hi sudden appear with an announc of mr. farebroth 
the effect of a sharp concuss.

“no, no,” said lydgat; “i have noth particular to sai to him.
but—the game is up—i must be go—i came in just to see bambridg.”

“bambridg is over there, but he is make a row—i don’t think he’
readi for busi. come down with me to farebroth. i expect he 
go to blow me up, and you will shield me,” said fred, with 
adroit.

lydgat felt shame, but could not bear to act as if he felt it, 
refus to see mr. farebroth; and he went down. thei mere 
hand, howev, and spoke of the frost; and when all three had 
into the street, the vicar seem quit will to sai good-by 
lydgat. hi present purpos wa clearli to talk with fred alon, 
he said, kindli, “i disturb you, young gentleman, becaus i have 
press busi with you. walk with me to st. botolph’s, will you?”

it wa a fine night, the sky thick with star, and mr. 
propos that thei should make a circuit to the old church by 
london road. the next thing he said wa—

“i thought lydgat never went to the green dragon?”

“so did i,” said fred. “but he said that he went to see bambridg.”

“he wa not plai, then?”

fred had not meant to tell thi, but he wa oblig now to sai, “ye,
he wa. but i suppos it wa an accident thing. i have never seen 
there befor.”

“you have been go often yourself, then, late?”

“oh, about five or six time.”

“i think you had some good reason for give up the habit of 
there?”

“ye. you know all about it,” said fred, not like to be catechis 
thi wai. “i made a clean breast to you.”

“i suppos that give me a warrant to speak about the matter now. it 
understood between us, is it not?—that we ar on a foot of 
friendship: i have listen to you, and you will be will to 
to me. i mai take my turn in talk a littl about myself?”

“i am under the deepest oblig to you, mr. farebroth,” said fred,
in a state of uncomfort surmis.

“i will not affect to deni that you ar under some oblig to me.
but i am go to confess to you, fred, that i have been tempt 
revers all that by keep silenc with you just now. when 
said to me, ‘young vinci ha taken to be at the billiard-tabl 
night again—he won’t bear the curb long;’ i wa tempt to do 
opposit of what i am do—to hold my tongu and wait while you 
down the ladder again, bet first and then—”

“i have not made ani bet,” said fred, hastili.

“glad to hear it. but i sai, my prompt wa to look on and see 
take the wrong turn, wear out garth’s patienc, and lose the 
opportun of your life—the opportun which you made some 
difficult effort to secur. you can guess the feel which rais 
temptat in me—i am sure you know it. i am sure you know that 
satisfact of your affect stand in the wai of mine.”

there wa a paus. mr. farebroth seem to wait for a recognit 
the fact; and the emot percept in the tone of hi fine 
gave solemn to hi word. but no feel could quell fred’s alarm.

“i could not be expect to give her up,” he said, after a moment’
hesit: it wa not a case for ani pretenc of generos.

“clearli not, when her affect met your. but relat of thi sort,
even when thei ar of long stand, ar alwai liabl to chang. i 
easili conceiv that you might act in a wai to loosen the tie she 
toward you—it must be rememb that she is onli condition 
to you—and that in that case, anoth man, who mai flatter himself 
he ha a hold on her regard, might succe in win that firm 
in her love as well as respect which you had let slip. i can 
conceiv such a result,” repeat mr. farebroth, emphat. “
is a companionship of readi sympathi, which might get the 
even over the longest associ.” it seem to fred that if mr.
farebroth had had a beak and talon instead of hi veri 
tongu, hi mode of attack could hardli be more cruel. he had 
horribl convict that behind all thi hypothet statement there 
a knowledg of some actual chang in mari’s feel.

“of cours i know it might easili be all up with me,” he said, in 
troubl voic. “if she is begin to compar—” he broke off, 
like to betrai all he felt, and then said, by the help of a 
bitter, “but i thought you were friendli to me.”

“so i am; that is why we ar here. but i have had a strong 
to be otherwis. i have said to myself, ‘if there is a likelihood 
that youngster do himself harm, why should you interfer? aren’t 
worth as much as he is, and don’t your sixteen year over and 
hi, in which you have gone rather hungri, give you more right 
satisfact than he ha? if there’s a chanc of hi go to the dog,
let him—perhap you could nohow hinder it—and do you take 
benefit.’”

there wa a paus, in which fred wa seiz by a most 
chill. what wa come next? he dread to hear that someth had 
said to mari—he felt as if he were listen to a threat rather than 
warn. when the vicar began again there wa a chang in hi tone 
the encourag transit to a major kei.

“but i had onc meant better than that, and i am come back to my 
intent. i thought that i could hardli _secur myself_ in it better,
fred, than by tell you just what had gone on in me. and now, do 
understand me? i want you to make the happi of her life and 
own, and if there is ani chanc that a word of warn from me mai 
asid ani risk to the contrari—well, i have utter it.”

there wa a drop in the vicar’s voic when he spoke the last word. 
paus—thei were stand on a patch of green where the road 
toward st. botolph’s, and he put out hi hand, as if to impli that 
convers wa close. fred wa move quit newli. some on 
suscept to the contempl of a fine act ha said, that 
produc a sort of regener shudder through the frame, and 
on feel readi to begin a new life. a good degre of that effect 
just then present in fred vinci.

“i will try to be worthi,” he said, break off befor he could 
“of you as well as of her.” and meanwhil mr. farebroth had 
the impuls to sai someth more.

“you must not imagin that i believ there is at present ani declin 
her prefer of you, fred. set your heart at rest, that if you 
right, other thing will keep right.”

“i shall never forget what you have done,” fred answer. “i can’t 
anyth that seem worth sai—onli i will try that your 
shall not be thrown awai.”

“that’s enough. good-by, and god bless you.”

in that wai thei part. but both of them walk about a long 
befor thei went out of the starlight. much of fred’s rumin 
be sum up in the word, “it certainli would have been a fine 
for her to marri farebroth—but if she love me best and i am a 
husband?”

perhap mr. farebroth’s might be concentr into a singl shrug 
on littl speech. “to think of the part on littl woman can plai 
the life of a man, so that to renounc her mai be a veri good 
of heroism, and to win her mai be a disciplin!”




chapter lxvii.

now is there civil war within the soul:
resolv is thrust from off the sacr 
by clamor need, and pride the grand-
make humbl compact, plai the suppl 
of envoi and deft-tongu 
for hungri rebel.


happili lydgat had end by lose in the billiard-room, and 
awai no encourag to make a raid on luck. on the contrari, he 
unmix disgust with himself the next dai when he had to pai four 
five pound over and abov hi gain, and he carri about with him 
most unpleas vision of the figur he had made, not onli 
elbow with the men at the green dragon but behav just as thei did.
a philosoph fallen to bet is hardli distinguish from 
philistin under the same circumst: the differ will chiefli 
found in hi subsequ reflect, and lydgat chew a 
disagre cud in that wai. hi reason told him how the affair 
have been magnifi into ruin by a slight chang of sceneri—if it 
been a gambl-hous that he had turn into, where chanc could 
clutch with both hand instead of be pick up with thumb 
fore-finger. nevertheless, though reason strangl the desir 
gambl, there remain the feel that, with an assur of luck 
the need amount, he would have like to gambl, rather than take 
altern which wa begin to urg itself as inevit.

that altern wa to appli to mr. bulstrod. lydgat had so 
time boast both to himself and other that he wa 
independ of bulstrod, to whose plan he had lent himself 
becaus thei enabl him to carri out hi own idea of 
work and public benefit—he had so constantli in their 
intercours had hi pride sustain by the sens that he wa make 
good social us of thi predomin banker, whose opinion he 
contempt and whose motiv often seem to him an absurd mixtur 
contradictori impress—that he had been creat for himself 
ideal obstacl to the proffer of ani consider request to him 
hi own account.

still, earli in march hi affair were at that pass in which men 
to sai that their oath were deliv in ignor, and to 
that the act which thei had call imposs to them is 
manifestli possibl. with dover’s ugli secur soon to be put 
forc, with the proce of hi practic immedi absorb in 
back debt, and with the chanc, if the worst were known, of 
suppli be refus on credit, abov all with the vision 
rosamond’s hopeless discont continu haunt him, lydgat 
begun to see that he should inevit bend himself to ask help 
somebodi or other. at first he had consid whether he should 
to mr. vinci; but on question rosamond he found that, as he 
suspect, she had alreadi appli twice to her father, the last 
be sinc the disappoint from sir godwin; and papa had said 
lydgat must look out for himself. “papa said he had come, with on 
year after anoth, to trade more and more on borrow capit, and 
had to give up mani indulg; he could not spare a singl 
from the charg of hi famili. he said, let lydgat ask bulstrod:
thei have alwai been hand and glove.”

inde, lydgat himself had come to the conclus that if he must 
by ask for a free loan, hi relat with bulstrod, more at 
than with ani other man, might take the shape of a claim which wa 
pure person. bulstrod had indirectli help to caus the 
of hi practic, and had also been highli gratifi by get 
medic partner in hi plan:—but who among us ever reduc himself 
the sort of depend in which lydgat now stood, without try 
believ that he had claim which diminish the humili of ask?
it wa true that of late there had seem to be a new languor 
interest in bulstrod about the hospit; but hi health had got wors,
and show sign of a deep-seat nervou affect. in other 
he did not appear to be chang: he had alwai been highli polit, 
lydgat had observ in him from the first a mark cold about 
marriag and other privat circumst, a cold which he 
hitherto prefer to ani warmth of familiar between them. 
defer the intent from dai to dai, hi habit of act on 
conclus be made infirm by hi repugn to everi 
conclus and it consequ act. he saw mr. bulstrod often, but 
did not try to us ani occas for hi privat purpos. at on 
he thought, “i will write a letter: i prefer that to ani 
talk;” at anoth he thought, “no; if i were talk to him, i 
make a retreat befor ani sign of disinclin.”

still the dai pass and no letter wa written, no special 
sought. in hi shrink from the humili of a depend 
toward bulstrod, he began to familiar hi imagin with 
step even more unlik hi rememb self. he began spontan 
consid whether it would be possibl to carri out that pueril 
of rosamond’s which had often made him angri, name, that thei 
quit middlemarch without see anyth beyond that prefac. 
question came—“would ani man bui the practic of me even now, for 
littl as it is worth? then the sale might happen as a 
prepar for go awai.”

but against hi take thi step, which he still felt to be 
contempt relinquish of present work, a guilti turn 
from what wa a real and might be a widen channel for 
activ, to start again without ani justifi destin, there 
thi obstacl, that the purchas, if procur at all, might not 
quickli forthcom. and afterward? rosamond in a poor lodg, 
in the largest citi or most distant town, would not find the life 
could save her from gloom, and save him from the reproach of 
plung her into it. for when a man is at the foot of the hill in 
fortun, he mai stai a long while there in spite of 
accomplish. in the british climat there is no 
between scientif insight and furnish lodg: the 
is chiefli between scientif ambit and a wife who object to 
kind of resid.

but in the midst of hi hesit, opportun came to decid him. 
note from mr. bulstrod request lydgat to call on him at the bank. 
hypochondriac tendenc had shown itself in the banker’s 
of late; and a lack of sleep, which wa realli onli a 
exagger of an habitu dyspept symptom, had been dwelt on by 
as a sign of threaten insan. he want to consult lydgat 
delai on that particular morn, although he had noth to 
beyond what he had told befor. he listen eagerli to what lydgat 
to sai in dissip of hi fear, though thi too wa 
repetit; and thi moment in which bulstrod wa receiv a 
opinion with a sens of comfort, seem to make the commun of 
person need to him easier than it had been in lydgat’s 
beforehand. he had been insist that it would be well for mr.
bulstrod to relax hi attent to busi.

“on see how ani mental strain, howev slight, mai affect a 
frame,” said lydgat at that stage of the consult when the 
tend to pass from the person to the gener, “by the deep stamp 
anxieti will make for a time even on the young and vigor. i 
natur veri strong; yet i have been thoroughli shaken late by 
accumul of troubl.”

“i presum that a constitut in the suscept state in which 
at present is, would be especi liabl to fall a victim to cholera,
if it visit our district. and sinc it appear near london, 
mai well besieg the merci-seat for our protect,” said mr.
bulstrod, not intend to evad lydgat’s allus, but 
preoccupi with alarm about himself.

“you have at all event taken your share in us good 
precaut for the town, and that is the best mode of ask 
protect,” said lydgat, with a strong distast for the 
metaphor and bad logic of the banker’s religion, somewhat increas 
the appar deaf of hi sympathi. but hi mind had taken up 
long-prepar movement toward get help, and wa not yet arrest.
he ad, “the town ha done well in the wai of cleans, and 
applianc; and i think that if the cholera should come, even 
enemi will admit that the arrang in the hospit ar a 
good.”

“truli,” said mr. bulstrod, with some cold. “with regard to 
you sai, mr. lydgat, about the relax of my mental labor, i 
for some time been entertain a purpos to that effect—a purpos of 
veri decid charact. i contempl at least a temporari 
from the manag of much busi, whether benevol or commerci.
also i think of chang my resid for a time: probabl i 
close or let ‘the shrub,’ and take some place near the coast—
advic of cours as to salubr. that would be a measur which 
would recommend?”

“oh ye,” said lydgat, fall backward in hi chair, 
ill-repress impati under the banker’s pale earnest ey 
intens preoccup with himself.

“i have for some time felt that i should open thi subject with you 
relat to our hospit,” continu bulstrod. “under 
circumst i have indic, of cours i must ceas to have 
person share in the manag, and it is contrari to my view 
respons to continu a larg applic of mean to 
institut which i cannot watch over and to some extent regul. 
shall therefor, in case of my ultim decis to leav middlemarch,
consid that i withdraw other support to the new hospit than 
which will subsist in the fact that i chiefli suppli the expens 
build it, and have contribut further larg sum to it 
work.”

lydgat’s thought, when bulstrod paus accord to hi wont, wa,
“he ha perhap been lose a good deal of monei.” thi wa the 
plausibl explan of a speech which had caus rather a 
chang in hi expect. he said in repli—

“the loss to the hospit can hardli be made up, i fear.”

“hardli,” return bulstrod, in the same deliber, silveri tone;
“except by some chang of plan. the onli person who mai be 
count on as will to increas her contribut is mr. casaubon. 
have had an interview with her on the subject, and i have point 
to her, as i am about to do to you, that it will be desir to win 
more gener support to the new hospit by a chang of system.”
anoth paus, but lydgat did not speak.

“the chang i mean is an amalgam with the infirmari, so that 
new hospit shall be regard as a special addit to the 
institut, have the same direct board. it will be necessari,
also, that the medic manag of the two shall be combin. in 
wai ani difficulti as to the adequ mainten of our 
establish will be remov; the benevol interest of the 
will ceas to be divid.”

mr. bulstrod had lower hi ey from lydgat’s face to the 
of hi coat as he again paus.

“no doubt that is a good devic as to wai and mean,” said lydgat,
with an edg of ironi in hi tone. “but i can’t be expect to 
in it at onc, sinc on of the first result will be that the 
medic men will upset or interrupt my method, if it were onli 
thei ar mine.”

“i myself, as you know, mr. lydgat, highli valu the opportun 
new and independ procedur which you have dilig emploi: 
origin plan, i confess, wa on which i had much at heart, 
submiss to the divin will. but sinc providenti 
demand a renunci from me, i renounc.”

bulstrod show a rather exasper abil in thi convers.
the broken metaphor and bad logic of motiv which had stir 
hearer’s contempt were quit consist with a mode of put 
fact which made it difficult for lydgat to vent hi own 
and disappoint. after some rapid reflect, he onli ask—

“what did mr. casaubon sai?”

“that wa the further statement which i wish to make to you,” 
bulstrod, who had thoroughli prepar hi ministeri explan.
“she is, you ar awar, a woman of most munific disposit, 
happili in possess—not i presum of great wealth, but of fund 
she can well spare. she ha inform me that though she ha 
the chief part of those fund to anoth purpos, she is will 
consid whether she cannot fulli take my place in relat to 
hospit. but she wish for ampl time to matur her thought on 
subject, and i have told her that there is no need for hast—that, 
fact, my own plan ar not yet absolut.”

lydgat wa readi to sai, “if mr. casaubon would take your place,
there would be gain, instead of loss.” but there wa still a weight 
hi mind which arrest thi cheer candor. he repli, “i suppos,
then, that i mai enter into the subject with mr. casaubon.”

“precis; that is what she expressli desir. her decis, she sai,
will much depend on what you can tell her. but not at present: she is,
i believ, just set out on a journei. i have her letter here,” 
mr. bulstrod, draw it out, and read from it. “‘i am 
otherwis engag,’ she sai. ‘i am go into yorkshir with sir 
and ladi chettam; and the conclus i come to about some land which 
am to see there mai affect my power of contribut to the hospit.’
thu, mr. lydgat, there is no hast necessari in thi matter; but 
wish to appris you beforehand of what mai possibl occur.”

mr. bulstrod return the letter to hi side-pocket, and chang 
attitud as if hi busi were close. lydgat, whose renew 
about the hospit onli made him more consciou of the fact 
poison hi hope, felt that hi effort after help, if made at all,
must be made now and vigor.

“i am much oblig to you for give me full notic,” he said, with 
firm intent in hi tone, yet with an interrupted in hi 
which show that he spoke unwillingli. “the highest object to me is 
profess, and i had identifi the hospit with the best us i 
at present make of my profess. but the best us is not alwai 
same with monetari success. everyth which ha made the 
unpopular ha help with other caus—i think thei ar all 
with my profession zeal—to make me unpopular as a practition. i 
chiefli patient who can’t pai me. i should like them best, if i 
nobodi to pai on my own side.” lydgat wait a littl, but 
onli bow, look at him fixedli, and he went on with the 
interrupt enunci—as if he were bite an object leek.

“i have slip into monei difficulti which i can see no wai out of,
unless some on who trust me and my futur will advanc me a 
without other secur. i had veri littl fortun left when i 
here. i have no prospect of monei from my own famili. my expens, 
consequ of my marriag, have been veri much greater than i 
expect. the result at thi moment is that it would take a 
pound to clear me. i mean, to free me from the risk of have all 
good sold in secur of my largest debt—as well as to pai my 
debt—and leav anyth to keep us a littl beforehand with our 
incom. i find that it is out of the question that my wife’s 
should make such an advanc. that is why i mention my posit to—
the onli other man who mai be held to have some person 
with my prosper or ruin.”

lydgat hate to hear himself. but he had spoken now, and had 
with unmistak direct. mr. bulstrod repli without hast, 
also without hesit.

“i am griev, though, i confess, not surpris by thi inform,
mr. lydgat. for my own part, i regret your allianc with 
brother-in-law’s famili, which ha alwai been of prodig habit, 
which ha alreadi been much indebt to me for sustain in 
present posit. my advic to you, mr. lydgat, would be, that 
of involv yourself in further oblig, and continu a 
struggl, you should simpli becom a bankrupt.”

“that would not improv my prospect,” said lydgat, rise and 
bitterli, “even if it were a more agreeabl thing in itself.”

“it is alwai a trial,” said mr. bulstrod; “but trial, my dear sir, 
our portion here, and is a need correct. i recommend you to 
the advic i have given.”

“thank you,” said lydgat, not quit know what he said. “i 
occupi you too long. good-dai.”




chapter lxviii.

what suit of grace hath virtu to put 
if vice shall wear as good, and do as well?
if wrong, if craft, if 
act as fair part with end as laudabl?
which all thi mighti volum of 
the world, the univers map of deed,
strongli control, and prove from all descent,
that the directest cours still best succe.
for should not grave and learn’d 
that look with the ey of all the world besid,
and with all ag hold intellig,
go safer than deceit without a guid!
—daniel: _musophilu_.


that chang of plan and shift of interest which bulstrod state 
betrai in hi convers with lydgat, had been determin in 
by some sever experi which he had gone through sinc the epoch 
mr. larcher’s sale, when raffl had recogn will ladislaw, and 
the banker had in vain attempt an act of restitut which might 
divin provid to arrest pain consequ.

hi certainti that raffl, unless he were dead, would return 
middlemarch befor long, had been justifi. on christma ev he 
reappear at the shrub. bulstrod wa at home to receiv him, 
hinder hi commun with the rest of the famili, but he could 
altogeth hinder the circumst of the visit from 
himself and alarm hi wife. raffl prove more unmanag than 
had shown himself to be in hi former appear, hi chronic state 
mental restless, the grow effect of habitu intemper,
quickli shake off everi impress from what wa said to him. 
insist on stai in the hous, and bulstrod, weigh two set 
evil, felt that thi wa at least not a wors altern than 
go into the town. he kept him in hi own room for the even 
saw him to bed, raffl all the while amus himself with 
annoy he wa caus thi decent and highli 
fellow-sinner, an amus which he faceti express as 
with hi friend’s pleasur in entertain a man who had 
servic to him, and who had not had all hi earn. there wa 
cun calcul under thi noisi joke—a cool resolv to 
someth the handsom from bulstrod as payment for releas from 
new applic of tortur. but hi cun had a littl overcast 
mark.

bulstrod wa inde more tortur than the coars fibr of 
could enabl him to imagin. he had told hi wife that he wa 
take care of thi wretch creatur, the victim of vice, who 
otherwis injur himself; he impli, without the direct form 
falsehood, that there wa a famili tie which bound him to thi care,
and that there were sign of mental alien in raffl which 
caution. he would himself drive the unfortun be awai the 
morn. in these hint he felt that he wa suppli mr. 
with precautionari inform for hi daughter and servant, 
account for hi allow no on but himself to enter the room 
with food and drink. but he sat in an agoni of fear lest raffl 
be overheard in hi loud and plain refer to past fact—lest mr.
bulstrod should be even tempt to listen at the door. how could 
hinder her, how betrai hi terror by open the door to detect her?
she wa a woman of honest direct habit, and littl like to take 
low a cours in order to arriv at pain knowledg; but fear 
stronger than the calcul of probabl.

in thi wai raffl had push the tortur too far, and produc 
effect which had not been in hi plan. by show himself 
unmanag he had made bulstrod feel that a strong defianc wa 
onli resourc left. after take raffl to bed that night the 
order hi close carriag to be readi at half-past seven the 
morn. at six o’clock he had alreadi been long dress, and had 
some of hi wretched in prayer, plead hi motiv for 
the worst evil if in anyth he had us falsiti and spoken what 
not true befor god. for bulstrod shrank from a direct lie with 
intens disproportion to the number of hi more indirect misde.
but mani of these misde were like the subtl muscular 
which ar not taken account of in the conscious, though thei 
about the end that we fix our mind on and desir. and it is onli 
we ar vividli consciou of that we can vividli imagin to be seen 
omnisci.

bulstrod carri hi candl to the bedsid of raffl, who 
appar in a pain dream. he stood silent, hope that 
presenc of the light would serv to waken the sleeper gradual 
gentli, for he fear some nois as the consequ of a too 
awaken. he had watch for a coupl of minut or more 
shudder and pant which seem like to end in wake, 
raffl, with a long half-stifl moan, start up and stare round 
in terror, trembl and gasp. but he made no further nois, 
bulstrod, set down the candl, await hi recoveri.

it wa a quarter of an hour later befor bulstrod, with a 
peremptori of manner which he had not befor shown, said, “i 
to call you thu earli, mr. raffl, becaus i have order 
carriag to be readi at half-past seven, and intend myself to 
you as far as ils, where you can either take the railwai or await 
coach.” raffl wa about to speak, but bulstrod anticip 
imperi with the word, “be silent, sir, and hear what i have 
sai. i shall suppli you with monei now, and i will furnish you with 
reason sum from time to time, on your applic to me by letter;
but if you choos to present yourself here again, if you return 
middlemarch, if you us your tongu in a manner injuri to me, 
will have to live on such fruit as your malic can bring you, 
help from me. nobodi will pai you well for blast my name: i know 
worst you can do against me, and i shall brave it if you dare to 
yourself upon me again. get up, sir, and do as i order you, 
nois, or i will send for a policeman to take you off my premis, 
you mai carri your stori into everi pothous in the town, but 
shall have no sixpenc from me to pai your expens there.”

bulstrod had rare in hi life spoken with such nervou energi: 
had been deliber on thi speech and it probabl effect through 
larg part of the night; and though he did not trust to it 
save him from ani return of raffl, he had conclud that it wa 
best throw he could make. it succeed in enforc submiss from 
jade man thi morn: hi empoison system at thi moment 
befor bulstrod’s cold, resolut bear, and he wa taken off 
in the carriag befor the famili breakfast time. the servant 
him to be a poor relat, and were not surpris that a strict 
like their master, who held hi head high in the world, should 
asham of such a cousin and want to get rid of him. the banker’s 
of ten mile with hi hate companion wa a dreari begin of 
christma dai; but at the end of the drive, raffl had recov 
spirit, and part in a content for which there wa the 
reason that the banker had given him a hundr pound. variou 
urg bulstrod to thi open-handed, but he did not himself 
close into all of them. as he had stood watch raffl in 
uneasi sleep, it had certainli enter hi mind that the man had 
much shatter sinc the first gift of two hundr pound.

he had taken care to repeat the incis statement of hi resolv 
to be plai on ani more; and had tri to penetr raffl with 
fact that he had shown the risk of bribe him to be quit equal 
the risk of defi him. but when, freed from hi repuls presenc,
bulstrod return to hi quiet home, he brought with him no 
that he had secur more than a respit. it wa as if he had had 
loathsom dream, and could not shake off it imag with their 
kindr of sensat—as if on all the pleasant surround of 
life a danger reptil had left hi slimi trace.

who can know how much of hi most inward life is made up of 
thought he believ other men to have about him, until that fabric 
opinion is threaten with ruin?

bulstrod wa onli the more consciou that there wa a deposit 
uneasi presenti in hi wife’s mind, becaus she carefulli 
ani allus to it. he had been us everi dai to tast the flavor 
supremaci and the tribut of complet defer: and the certainti 
he wa watch or measur with a hidden suspicion of hi have 
discredit secret, made hi voic totter when he wa speak 
edif. forese, to men of bulstrod’s anxiou tempera, 
often wors than see; and hi imagin continu heighten 
anguish of an immin disgrac. ye, immin; for if hi defianc 
raffl did not keep the man awai—and though he prai for thi 
he hardli hope for it—the disgrac wa certain. in vain he said 
himself that, if permit, it would be a divin visit, 
chastis, a prepar; he recoil from the imagin burn; 
he judg that it must be more for the divin glori that he 
escap dishonor. that recoil had at last urg him to make 
for quit middlemarch. if evil truth must be report of him, 
would then be at a less scorch distanc from the contempt of hi 
neighbor; and in a new scene, where hi life would not have 
the same wide sensibl, the tormentor, if he pursu him, would 
less formid. to leav the place final would, he knew, 
extrem pain to hi wife, and on other ground he would 
prefer to stai where he had struck root. henc he made 
prepar at first in a condit wai, wish to leav on 
side an open for hi return after brief absenc, if ani 
intervent of provid should dissip hi fear. he wa 
to transfer hi manag of the bank, and to give up ani 
control of other commerci affair in the neighborhood, on the 
of hi fail health, but without exclud hi futur resumpt 
such work. the measur would caus him some ad expens and 
diminut of incom beyond what he had alreadi undergon from 
gener depress of trade; and the hospit present itself as 
princip object of outlai on which he could fairli econom.

thi wa the experi which had determin hi convers 
lydgat. but at thi time hi arrang had most of them gone 
farther than a stage at which he could recal them if thei prove to 
unnecessari. he continu defer the final step; in the midst 
hi fear, like mani a man who is in danger of shipwreck or of 
dash from hi carriag by runawai hors, he had a 
impress that someth would happen to hinder the worst, and that 
spoil hi life by a late transplant might be over-hasti—
sinc it wa difficult to account satisfactorili to hi wife for 
project of their indefinit exil from the onli place where she 
like to live.

among the affair bulstrod had to care for, wa the manag of 
farm at stone court in case of hi absenc; and on thi as well as 
all other matter connect with ani hous and land he possess in 
about middlemarch, he had consult caleb garth. like everi on 
who had busi of that sort, he want to get the agent who wa 
anxiou for hi employ’s interest than hi own. with regard to 
court, sinc bulstrod wish to retain hi hold on the stock, and 
have an arrang by which he himself could, if he chose, resum 
favorit recreat of superintend, caleb had advis him not 
trust to a mere bailiff, but to let the land, stock, and 
yearli, and take a proportion share of the proce.

“mai i trust to you to find me a tenant on these term, mr. garth?”
said bulstrod. “and will you mention to me the yearli sum which 
repai you for manag these affair which we have discuss togeth?”

“i’ll think about it,” said caleb, in hi blunt wai. “i’ll see how 
can make it out.”

if it had not been that he had to consid fred vinci’s futur, mr.
garth would not probabl have been glad of ani addit to hi work, 
which hi wife wa alwai fear an excess for him as he grew older.
but on quit bulstrod after that convers, a veri allur 
occur to him about thi said let of stone court. what 
bulstrod would agre to hi place fred vinci there on 
understand that he, caleb garth, should be respons for 
manag? it would be an excel school for fred; he might 
a modest incom there, and still have time left to get knowledg 
help in other busi. he mention hi notion to mr. garth 
such evid delight that she could not bear to chill hi pleasur 
express her constant fear of hi undertak too much.

“the lad would be as happi as two,” he said, throw himself back 
hi chair, and look radiant, “if i could tell him it wa 
settl. think; susan! hi mind had been run on that place 
year befor old featherston di. and it would be as pretti a turn 
thing as could be that he should hold the place in a good 
wai after all—by hi take to busi. for it’s like 
bulstrod might let him go on, and gradual bui the stock. he hasn’
made up hi mind, i can see, whether or not he shall settl 
els as a last thing. i never wa better pleas with a notion in 
life. and then the children might be marri by-and-by, susan.”

“you will not give ani hint of the plan to fred, until you ar 
that bulstrod would agre to the plan?” said mr. garth, in a tone 
gentl caution. “and as to marriag, caleb, we old peopl need not 
to hasten it.”

“oh, i don’t know,” said caleb, swing hi head asid. “marriag is 
tame thing. fred would want less of my bit and bridl. howev, 
shall sai noth till i know the ground i’m tread on. i shall 
to bulstrod again.”

he took hi earliest opportun of do so. bulstrod had 
but a warm interest in hi nephew fred vinci, but he had a strong 
to secur mr. garth’s servic on mani scatter point of busi 
which he wa sure to be a consider loser, if thei were under 
conscienti manag. on that ground he made no object to mr.
garth’s propos; and there wa also anoth reason why he wa 
sorri to give a consent which wa to benefit on of the vinci famili.
it wa that mr. bulstrod, have heard of lydgat’s debt, had 
anxiou to know whether her husband could not do someth for 
rosamond, and had been much troubl on learn from him 
lydgat’s affair were not easili remedi, and that the wisest 
wa to let them “take their cours.” mr. bulstrod had then said 
the first time, “i think you ar alwai a littl hard toward 
famili, nichola. and i am sure i have no reason to deni ani of 
rel. too worldli thei mai be, but no on ever had to sai 
thei were not respect.”

“my dear harriet,” said mr. bulstrod, winc under hi wife’s ey,
which were fill with tear, “i have suppli your brother with 
great deal of capit. i cannot be expect to take care of hi 
children.”

that seem to be true, and mr. bulstrod’s remonstr subsid 
piti for poor rosamond, whose extravag educ she had 
foreseen the fruit of.

but rememb that dialogu, mr. bulstrod felt that when he had 
talk to hi wife fulli about hi plan of quit middlemarch, 
should be glad to tell her that he had made an arrang which 
be for the good of her nephew fred. at present he had mere 
to her that he thought of shut up the shrub for a few month, 
take a hous on the southern coast.

henc mr. garth got the assur he desir, name, that in case 
bulstrod’s departur from middlemarch for an indefinit time, 
vinci should be allow to have the tenanc of stone court on the 
propos.

caleb wa so elat with hi hope of thi “neat turn” be given 
thing, that if hi self-control had not been brace by a 
affection wife scold, he would have betrai everyth 
mari, want “to give the child comfort.” howev, he 
himself, and kept in strict privaci from fred certain visit which 
wa make to stone court, in order to look more thoroughli into 
state of the land and stock, and take a preliminari estim. he 
certainli more eager in these visit than the probabl speed of 
requir him to be; but he wa stimul by a fatherli delight 
occupi hi mind with thi bit of probabl happi which he held 
store like a hidden birthdai gift for fred and mari.

“but suppos the whole scheme should turn out to be a castl in 
air?” said mr. garth.

“well, well,” repli caleb; “the castl will tumbl about nobodi’
head.”




chapter lxix.

“if thou hast heard a word, let it die with thee.”
—_ecclesiasticu_.


mr. bulstrod wa still seat in hi manag’s room at the bank, 
three o’clock of the same dai on which he had receiv lydgat there,
when the clerk enter to sai that hi hors wa wait, and also 
mr. garth wa outsid and beg to speak with him.

“by all mean,” said bulstrod; and caleb enter. “prai sit down, mr.
garth,” continu the banker, in hi suavest tone.

“i am glad that you arriv just in time to find me here. i know 
count your minut.”

“oh,” said caleb, gentli, with a slow swing of hi head on on side, 
he seat himself and laid hi hat on the floor.

he look at the ground, lean forward and let hi long 
droop between hi leg, while each finger move in success, as if 
were share some thought which fill hi larg quiet brow.

mr. bulstrod, like everi on els who knew caleb, wa us to 
slow in begin to speak on ani topic which he felt to 
import, and rather expect that he wa about to recur to the 
of some hous in blindman’s court, for the sake of pull them down,
as a sacrific of properti which would be well repaid by the influx 
air and light on that spot. it wa by proposit of thi kind 
caleb wa sometim troublesom to hi employ; but he had 
found bulstrod readi to meet him in project of improv, and 
had got on well togeth. when he spoke again, howev, it wa to sai,
in rather a subdu voic—

“i have just come awai from stone court, mr. bulstrod.”

“you found noth wrong there, i hope,” said the banker; “i wa 
myself yesterdai. abel ha done well with the lamb thi year.”

“why, ye,” said caleb, look up grave, “there is someth wrong—
stranger, who is veri ill, i think. he want a doctor, and i came 
tell you of that. hi name is raffl.”

he saw the shock of hi word pass through bulstrod’s frame. 
thi subject the banker had thought that hi fear were too 
on the watch to be taken by surpris; but he had been mistaken.

“poor wretch!” he said in a compassion tone, though hi 
trembl a littl. “do you know how he came there?”

“i took him myself,” said caleb, quietli—“took him up in my gig. he 
got down from the coach, and wa walk a littl beyond the 
from the toll-hous, and i overtook him. he rememb see me 
you onc befor, at stone court, and he ask me to take him on. i 
he wa ill: it seem to me the right thing to do, to carri him 
shelter. and now i think you should lose no time in get advic 
him.” caleb took up hi hat from the floor as he end, and rose 
from hi seat.

“certainli,” said bulstrod, whose mind wa veri activ at thi moment.
“perhap you will yourself oblig me, mr. garth, by call at mr.
lydgat’s as you pass—or stai! he mai at thi hour probabl be at 
hospit. i will first send my man on the hors there with a note 
instant, and then i will myself ride to stone court.”

bulstrod quickli wrote a note, and went out himself to give 
commiss to hi man. when he return, caleb wa stand as 
with on hand on the back of the chair, hold hi hat with the other.
in bulstrod’s mind the domin thought wa, “perhap raffl 
spoke to garth of hi ill. garth mai wonder, as he must have 
befor, at thi disreput fellow’s claim intimaci with me; but 
will know noth. and he is friendli to me—i can be of us to him.”

he long for some confirm of thi hope conjectur, but to 
ask ani question as to what raffl had said or done would have 
to betrai fear.

“i am exceedingli oblig to you, mr. garth,” he said, in hi 
tone of polit. “my servant will be back in a few minut, and 
shall then go myself to see what can be done for thi unfortun man.
perhap you had some other busi with me? if so, prai be seat.”

“thank you,” said caleb, make a slight gestur with hi right hand 
waiv the invit. “i wish to sai, mr. bulstrod, that i 
request you to put your busi into some other hand than mine. i 
oblig to you for your handsom wai of meet me—about the let 
stone court, and all other busi. but i must give it up.” a 
certainti enter like a stab into bulstrod’s soul.

“thi is sudden, mr. garth,” wa all he could sai at first.

“it is,” said caleb; “but it is quit fix. i must give it up.”

he spoke with a firm which wa veri gentl, and yet he could 
that bulstrod seem to cower under that gentl, hi face 
dri and hi ey swerv awai from the glanc which rest on him.
caleb felt a deep piti for him, but he could have us no pretext 
account for hi resolv, even if thei would have been of ani us.

“you have been led to thi, i apprehend, by some slander concern 
utter by that unhappi creatur,” said bulstrod, anxiou now to 
the utmost.

“that is true. i can’t deni that i act upon what i heard from him.”

“you ar a conscienti man, mr. garth—a man, i trust, who 
himself account to god. you would not wish to injur me by 
too readi to believ a slander,” said bulstrod, cast about 
plea that might be adapt to hi hearer’s mind. “that is a 
reason for give up a connect which i think i mai sai will 
mutual benefici.”

“i would injur no man if i could help it,” said caleb; “even if 
thought god wink at it. i hope i should have a feel for 
fellow-creatur. but, sir—i am oblig to believ that thi raffl 
told me the truth. and i can’t be happi in work with you, 
profit by you. it hurt my mind. i must beg you to seek 
agent.”

“veri well, mr. garth. but i must at least claim to know the worst 
he ha told you. i must know what is the foul speech that i am 
to be the victim of,” said bulstrod, a certain amount of 
begin to mingl with hi humili befor thi quiet man 
renounc hi benefit.

“that’s needless,” said caleb, wave hi hand, bow hi 
slightli, and not swerv from the tone which had in it the 
intent to spare thi pitiabl man. “what he ha said to me 
never pass from my lip, unless someth now unknown forc it 
me. if you led a harm life for gain, and kept other out of 
right by deceit, to get the more for yourself, i dare sai 
repent—you would like to go back, and can’t: that must be a 
thing”—caleb paus a moment and shook hi head—“it is not for me 
make your life harder to you.”

“but you do—you do make it harder to me,” said bulstrod 
into a genuin, plead cry. “you make it harder to me by turn 
back on me.”

“that i’m forc to do,” said caleb, still more gentli, lift up 
hand. “i am sorri. i don’t judg you and sai, he is wick, and i 
righteou. god forbid. i don’t know everyth. a man mai do wrong, 
hi will mai rise clear out of it, though he can’t get hi life clear.
that’s a bad punish. if it is so with you,—well, i’m veri sorri 
you. but i have that feel insid me, that i can’t go on work 
you. that’s all, mr. bulstrod. everyth els is buri, so far as 
will goe. and i wish you good-dai.”

“on moment, mr. garth!” said bulstrod, hurriedli. “i mai trust 
to your solemn assur that you will not repeat either to man 
woman what—even if it have ani degre of truth in it—is yet a 
represent?” caleb’s wrath wa stir, and he said, indignantli—

“why should i have said it if i didn’t mean it? i am in no fear of you.
such tale as that will never tempt my tongu.”

“excus me—i am agit—i am the victim of thi abandon man.”

“stop a bit! you have got to consid whether you didn’t help to 
him wors, when you profit by hi vice.”

“you ar wrong me by too readili believ him,” said bulstrod,
oppress, as by a nightmar, with the inabl to deni flatli 
raffl might have said; and yet feel it an escap that caleb 
not so state it to him as to ask for that flat denial.

“no,” said caleb, lift hi hand deprecatingli; “i am readi 
believ better, when better is prove. i rob you of no good chanc. 
to speak, i hold it a crime to expos a man’s sin unless i’m 
it must be done to save the innoc. that is my wai of think, mr.
bulstrod, and what i sai, i’ve no need to swear. i wish you good-dai.”

some hour later, when he wa at home, caleb said to hi wife,
incident, that he had had some littl differ with bulstrod,
and that in consequ, he had given up all notion of take 
court, and inde had resign do further busi for him.

“he wa dispos to interfer too much, wa he?” said mr. garth,
imagin that her husband had been touch on hi sensit point, 
not been allow to do what he thought right as to materi and 
of work.

“oh,” said caleb, bow hi head and wave hi hand grave. and mr.
garth knew that thi wa a sign of hi not intend to speak 
on the subject.

as for bulstrod, he had almost immedi mount hi hors and 
off for stone court, be anxiou to arriv there befor lydgat.

hi mind wa crowd with imag and conjectur, which were a 
to hi hope and fear, just as we hear tone from the vibrat 
shake our whole system. the deep humili with which he had 
under caleb garth’s knowledg of hi past and reject of 
patronag, altern with and almost gave wai to the sens of 
in the fact that garth, and no other, had been the man to whom 
had spoken. it seem to him a sort of earnest that provid 
hi rescu from wors consequ; the wai be thu left open 
the hope of secreci. that raffl should be afflict with ill,
that he should have been led to stone court rather 
elsewher—bulstrod’s heart flutter at the vision of 
which these event conjur up. if it should turn out that he wa 
from all danger of disgrac—if he could breath in perfect liberti—
life should be more consecr than it had ever been befor. 
mental lift up thi vow as if it would urg the result he 
for—he tri to believ in the potenc of that prayer resolut—
potenc to determin death. he knew that he ought to sai, “thy will 
done;” and he said it often. but the intens desir remain that 
will of god might be the death of that hate man.

yet when he arriv at stone court he could not see the chang 
raffl without a shock. but for hi pallor and feebl, 
would have call the chang in him entir mental. instead of 
loud torment mood, he show an intens, vagu terror, and seem 
deprec bulstrod’s anger, becaus the monei wa all gone—he had 
rob—it had half of it been taken from him. he had onli come 
becaus he wa ill and somebodi wa hunt him—somebodi wa after him,
he had told nobodi anyth, he had kept hi mouth shut. bulstrod, 
know the signific of these symptom, interpret thi 
nervou suscept into a mean of alarm raffl into 
confess, and tax him with falsehood in sai that he had 
told anyth, sinc he had just told the man who took him up in 
gig and brought him to stone court. raffl deni thi with 
adjur; the fact be that the link of conscious 
interrupt in him, and that hi minut terror-stricken narr 
caleb garth had been deliv under a set of visionari impuls 
had drop back into dark.

bulstrod’s heart sank again at thi sign that he could get no 
over the wretch man’s mind, and that no word of raffl could 
trust as to the fact which he most want to know, name, whether 
not he had realli kept silenc to everi on in the neighborhood 
caleb garth. the housekeep had told him without the least 
of manner that sinc mr. garth left, raffl had ask her for beer,
and after that had not spoken, seem veri ill. on that side it 
be conclud that there had been no betray. mr. abel thought, 
the servant at the shrub, that the strang man belong to 
unpleas “kin” who ar among the troubl of the rich; she had 
first refer the kinship to mr. rigg, and where there wa 
left, the buzz presenc of such larg blue-bottl seem 
enough. how he could be “kin” to bulstrod as well wa not so clear,
but mr. abel agre with her husband that there wa “no know,” 
proposit which had a great deal of mental food for her, so that 
shook her head over it without further specul.

in less than an hour lydgat arriv. bulstrod met him outsid 
wainscot parlor, where raffl wa, and said—

“i have call you in, mr. lydgat, to an unfortun man who wa 
in my employ, mani year ago. afterward he went to america, 
return i fear to an idl dissolut life. be destitut, he ha 
claim on me. he wa slightli connect with rigg, the former owner 
thi place, and in consequ found hi wai here. i believ he 
serious ill: appar hi mind is affect. i feel bound to do 
utmost for him.”

lydgat, who had the remembr of hi last convers 
bulstrod strongli upon him, wa not dispos to sai an 
word to him, and bow slightli in answer to thi account; but 
befor enter the room he turn automat and said, “what is 
name?”—to know name be as much a part of the medic man’
accomplish as of the practic politician’s.

“raffl, john raffl,” said bulstrod, who hope that whatev 
of raffl, lydgat would never know ani more of him.

when he had thoroughli examin and consid the patient, 
order that he should go to bed, and be kept there in as 
quiet as possibl, and then went with bulstrod into anoth room.

“it is a seriou case, i apprehend,” said the banker, befor 
began to speak.

“no—and ye,” said lydgat, half dubious. “it is difficult to 
as to the possibl effect of long-stand complic; but the 
had a robust constitut to begin with. i should not expect 
attack to be fatal, though of cours the system is in a ticklish state.
he should be well watch and attend to.”

“i will remain here myself,” said bulstrod. “mr. abel and her 
ar inexperienc. i can easili remain here for the night, if you 
oblig me by take a note for mr. bulstrod.”

“i should think that is hardli necessari,” said lydgat. “he seem 
and terrifi enough. he might becom more unmanag. but there is 
man here—is there not?”

“i have more than onc stai here a few night for the sake 
seclus,” said bulstrod, indiffer; “i am quit dispos to 
so now. mr. abel and her husband can reliev or aid me, if necessari.”

“veri well. then i need give my direct onli to you,” said lydgat,
not feel surpris at a littl peculiar in bulstrod.

“you think, then, that the case is hope?” said bulstrod, 
lydgat had end give hi order.

“unless there turn out to be further complic, such as i have 
at present detect—ye,” said lydgat. “he mai pass on to a 
stage; but i should not wonder if he got better in a few dai, 
adher to the treatment i have prescrib. there must be firm.
rememb, if he call for liquor of ani sort, not to give them to him.
in my opinion, men in hi condit ar often kill by 
than by the diseas. still, new symptom mai aris. i shall come 
to-morrow morn.”

after wait for the note to be carri to mr. bulstrod, 
rode awai, form no conjectur, in the first instanc, about 
histori of raffl, but rehears the whole argument, which had 
been much stir by the public of dr. ware’s abund 
in america, as to the right wai of treat case of 
poison such as thi. lydgat, when abroad, had alreadi 
interest in thi question: he wa strongli convinc against 
preval practic of allow alcohol and persist 
larg dose of opium; and he had repeatedli act on thi 
with a favor result.

“the man is in a diseas state,” he thought, “but there’s a good 
of wear in him still. i suppos he is an object of chariti 
bulstrod. it is curiou what patch of hard and tender 
side by side in men’s disposit. bulstrod seem the 
unsympathet fellow i ever saw about some peopl, and yet he ha 
no end of troubl, and spent a great deal of monei, on 
object. i suppos he ha some test by which he find out whom 
care for—he ha made up hi mind that it doesn’t care for me.”

thi streak of bitter came from a plenteou sourc, and 
widen in the current of hi thought as he near lowick gate. he 
not been there sinc hi first interview with bulstrod in the morn,
have been found at the hospit by the banker’s messeng; and 
the first time he wa return to hi home without the vision of 
expedi in the background which left him a hope of rais 
enough to deliv him from the come destitut of everyth 
made hi marri life toler—everyth which save him and 
from that bare isol in which thei would be forc to recogn 
littl of a comfort thei could be to each other. it wa more 
to do without tender for himself than to see that hi 
tender could make no amend for the lack of other thing to her.
the suffer of hi own pride from humili past and to come 
keen enough, yet thei were hardli distinguish to himself from 
more acut pain which domin them—the pain of forese 
rosamond would come to regard him chiefli as the caus 
disappoint and unhappi to her. he had never like 
makeshift of poverti, and thei had never befor enter into 
prospect for himself; but he wa begin now to imagin how 
creatur who love each other, and had a stock of thought in common,
might laugh over their shabbi furnitur, and their calcul how 
thei could afford butter and egg. but the glimps of that 
seem as far off from him as the careless of the golden ag; 
poor rosamond’s mind there wa not room enough for luxuri to 
small in. he got down from hi hors in a veri sad mood, and went 
the hous, not expect to be cheer except by hi dinner, 
reflect that befor the even close it would be wise to 
rosamond of hi applic to bulstrod and it failur. it would 
well not to lose time in prepar her for the worst.

but hi dinner wait long for him befor he wa abl to eat it. for 
enter he found that dover’s agent had alreadi put a man in 
hous, and when he ask where mr. lydgat wa, he wa told that 
wa in her bedroom. he went up and found her stretch on the bed 
and silent, without an answer even in her face to ani word or look 
hi. he sat down by the bed and lean over her said with almost a 
of prayer—

“forgiv me for thi miseri, my poor rosamond! let us onli love 
anoth.”

she look at him silent, still with the blank despair on her face;
but then the tear began to fill her blue ey, and her lip trembl.
the strong man had had too much to bear that dai. he let hi head 
besid her and sob.

he did not hinder her from go to her father earli in the morn—
seem now that he ought not to hinder her from do as she pleas.
in half an hour she came back, and said that papa and mamma wish 
to go and stai with them while thing were in thi miser state.
papa said he could do noth about the debt—if he paid thi, 
would be half-a-dozen more. she had better come back home again 
lydgat had got a comfort home for her. “do you object, tertiu?”

“do as you like,” said lydgat. “but thing ar not come to a 
immedi. there is no hurri.”

“i should not go till to-morrow,” said rosamond; “i shall want to 
my cloth.”

“oh, i would wait a littl longer than to-morrow—there is no 
what mai happen,” said lydgat, with bitter ironi. “i mai get my 
broken, and that mai make thing easier to you.”

it wa lydgat’s misfortun and rosamond’s too, that hi 
toward her, which wa both an emot prompt and 
well-consid resolv, wa inevit interrupt by these 
of indign either iron or remonstr. she thought them 
unwarr, and the repuls which thi except sever 
in her wa in danger of make the more persist 
unaccept.

“i see you do not wish me to go,” she said, with chill mild; “
can you not sai so, without that kind of violenc? i shall stai 
you request me to do otherwis.”

lydgat said no more, but went out on hi round. he felt bruis 
shatter, and there wa a dark line under hi ey which rosamond 
not seen befor. she could not bear to look at him. tertiu had a 
of take thing which made them a great deal wors for her.




chapter lxx.

“our deed still travel with us from afar,
and what we have been make us what we ar.”


bulstrod’s first object after lydgat had left stone court wa 
examin raffl’s pocket, which he imagin were sure to carri 
in the shape of hotel-bill of the place he had stop in, if he 
not told the truth in sai that he had come straight from 
becaus he wa ill and had no monei. there were variou bill 
into hi pocketbook, but none of a later date than christma at 
other place, except on, which bore date that morn. thi 
crumpl up with a hand-bill about a hors-fair in on of 
tail-pocket, and repres the cost of three dai’ stai at an inn 
bilklei, where the fair wa held—a town at least forti mile 
middlemarch. the bill wa heavi, and sinc raffl had no luggag 
him, it seem probabl that he had left hi portmanteau behind 
payment, in order to save monei for hi travel fare; for hi 
wa empti, and he had onli a coupl of sixpenc and some loos 
in hi pocket.

bulstrod gather a sens of safeti from these indic 
raffl had realli kept at a distanc from middlemarch sinc 
memor visit at christma. at a distanc and among peopl who 
stranger to bulstrod, what satisfact could there be to raffl’
torment, self-magnifi vein in tell old scandal 
about a middlemarch banker? and what harm if he did talk? the 
point now wa to keep watch over him as long as there wa ani danger 
that intellig rave, that unaccount impuls to tell, 
seem to have act toward caleb garth; and bulstrod felt 
anxieti lest some such impuls should come over him at the sight 
lydgat. he sat up alon with him through the night, onli order 
housekeep to lie down in her cloth, so as to be readi when 
call her, alleg hi own indisposit to sleep, and hi anxieti 
carri out the doctor’s order. he did carri them out faithfulli,
although raffl wa incessantli ask for brandi, and declar 
he wa sink awai—that the earth wa sink awai from under him. 
wa restless and sleepless, but still quail and manag. on 
offer of the food order by lydgat, which he refus, and the 
of other thing which he demand, he seem to concentr all 
terror on bulstrod, imploringli deprec hi anger, hi reveng 
him by starvat, and declar with strong oath that he had 
told ani mortal a word against him. even thi bulstrod felt that 
would not have like lydgat to hear; but a more alarm sign 
fit altern in hi delirium wa, that in-the morn 
raffl suddenli seem to imagin a doctor present, address him 
declar that bulstrod want to starv him to death out of 
for tell, when he never had told.

bulstrod’s nativ imperi and strength of determin 
him well. thi delic-look man, himself nervous perturb, 
the need stimulu in hi strenuou circumst, and through 
difficult night and morn, while he had the air of an anim 
return to movement without warmth, hold the masteri by it 
impass, hi mind wa intens at work think of what he 
to guard against and what would win him secur. whatev prayer 
might lift up, whatev statement he might inwardli make of thi man’
wretch spiritu condit, and the duti he himself wa under 
submit to the punish divin appoint for him rather than to 
for evil to anoth—through all thi effort to condens word into 
solid mental state, there pierc and spread with 
vivid the imag of the event he desir. and in the train 
those imag came their apolog. he could not but see the death 
raffl, and see in it hi own deliver. what wa the remov 
thi wretch creatur? he wa impenit—but were not public 
impenit?—yet the law decid on their fate. should provid 
thi case award death, there wa no sin in contempl death as 
desir issu—if he kept hi hand from hasten it—if 
scrupul did what wa prescrib. even here there might be 
mistak: human prescript were fallibl thing: lydgat had 
that treatment had hasten death,—why not hi own method of treatment?
but of cours intent wa everyth in the question of right 
wrong.

and bulstrod set himself to keep hi intent separ from 
desir. he inwardli declar that he intend to obei order. 
should he have got into ani argument about the valid of 
order? it wa onli the common trick of desir—which avail itself 
ani irrelev sceptic, find larger room for itself in 
uncertainti about effect, in everi obscur that look like 
absenc of law. still, he did obei the order.

hi anxieti continu glanc toward lydgat, and hi 
of what had taken place between them the morn befor wa 
with sensibl which had not been rous at all dure the 
scene. he had then care but littl about lydgat’s pain 
with regard to the suggest chang in the hospit, or about 
disposit toward himself which what he held to be hi 
refus of a rather exorbit request might call forth. he recur 
the scene now with a percept that he had probabl made lydgat 
enemi, and with an awaken desir to propiti him, or rather 
creat in him a strong sens of person oblig. he regret 
he had not at onc made even an unreason monei-sacrific. for 
case of unpleas suspicion, or even knowledg gather from 
rave of raffl, bulstrod would have felt that he had a defenc 
lydgat’s mind by have confer a moment benefit on him. but 
regret had perhap come too late.

strang, piteou conflict in the soul of thi unhappi man, who 
long for year to be better than he wa—who had taken hi 
passion into disciplin and clad them in sever robe, so that he 
walk with them as a devout choir, till now that a terror had 
among them, and thei could chant no longer, but threw out their 
cri for safeti.

it wa nearli the middl of the dai befor lydgat arriv: he 
meant to come earlier, but had been detain, he said; and 
shatter look were notic by balstrod. but he immedi 
himself into the consider of the patient, and inquir 
into all that had occur. raffl wa wors, would take hardli 
food, wa persist wake and restlessli rave; but still 
violent. contrari to bulstrod’s alarm expect, he took 
notic of lydgat’s presenc, and continu to talk or 
incoher.

“what do you think of him?” said bulstrod, in privat.

“the symptom ar wors.”

“you ar less hope?”

“no; i still think he mai come round. ar you go to stai 
yourself?” said lydgat, look at bulstrod with an abrupt question,
which made him uneasi, though in realiti it wa not due to 
suspici conjectur.

“ye, i think so,” said bulstrod, govern himself and speak 
deliber. “mr. bulstrod is advis of the reason which 
me. mr. abel and her husband ar not experienc enough to be 
quit alon, and thi kind of respons is scarc includ 
their servic of me. you have some fresh instruct, i presum.”

the chief new instruct that lydgat had to give wa on 
administr of extrem moder dose of opium, in case of 
sleepless continu after sever hour. he had taken 
precaut of bring opium in hi pocket, and he gave 
direct to bulstrod as to the dose, and the point at which 
should ceas. he insist on the risk of not ceas; and repeat 
order that no alcohol should be given.

“from what i see of the case,” he end, “narcot is the onli thing 
should be much afraid of. he mai wear through even without much food.
there’s a good deal of strength in him.”

“you look ill yourself, mr. lydgat—a most unusu, i mai 
unpreced thing in my knowledg of you,” said bulstrod, show 
solicitud as unlik hi indiffer the dai befor, as hi 
reckless about hi own fatigu wa unlik hi 
self-cherish anxieti. “i fear you ar harass.”

“ye, i am,” said lydgat, brusqu, hold hi hat, and readi to go.

“someth new, i fear,” said bulstrod, inquiringli. “prai be seat.”

“no, thank you,” said lydgat, with some hauteur. “i mention to 
yesterdai what wa the state of my affair. there is noth to add,
except that the execut ha sinc then been actual put into 
hous. on can tell a good deal of troubl in a short sentenc. i 
sai good morn.”

“stai, mr. lydgat, stai,” said bulstrod; “i have been 
thi subject. i wa yesterdai taken by surpris, and saw 
superfici. mr. bulstrod is anxiou for her niec, and i 
should griev at a calamit chang in your posit. claim on me 
numer, but on reconsider, i esteem it right that i should 
a small sacrific rather than leav you unaid. you said, i think,
that a thousand pound would suffic entir to free you from 
burthen, and enabl you to recov a firm stand?”

“ye,” said lydgat, a great leap of joi within him surmount 
other feel; “that would pai all my debt, and leav me a littl 
hand. i could set about econom in our wai of live. and by-and-
my practic might look up.”

“if you will wait a moment, mr. lydgat, i will draw a check to 
amount. i am awar that help, to be effectu in these case, should 
thorough.”

while bulstrod wrote, lydgat turn to the window think of 
home—think of hi life with it good start save from frustrat,
it good purpos still unbroken.

“you can give me a note of hand for thi, mr. lydgat,” said 
banker, advanc toward him with the check. “and by-and-by, i hope,
you mai be in circumst gradual to repai me. meanwhil, i 
pleasur in think that you will be releas from 
difficulti.”

“i am deepli oblig to you,” said lydgat. “you have restor to 
the prospect of work with some happi and some chanc of good.”

it appear to him a veri natur movement in bulstrod that he 
have reconsid hi refus: it correspond with the more 
side of hi charact. but as he put hi hack into a canter, that 
might get the sooner home, and tell the good new to rosamond, and 
cash at the bank to pai over to dover’s agent, there cross hi mind,
with an unpleas impress, as from a dark-wing flight of 
auguri across hi vision, the thought of that contrast in himself 
a few month had brought—that he should be overjoi at be under 
strong person oblig—that he should be overjoi at get 
for himself from bulstrod.

the banker felt that he had done someth to nullifi on caus 
uneasi, and yet he wa scarc the easier. he did not measur 
quantiti of diseas motiv which had made him wish for lydgat’
good-will, but the quantiti wa none the less activ there, like 
irrit agent in hi blood. a man vow, and yet will not cast 
the mean of break hi vow. is it that he distinctli mean to 
it? not at all; but the desir which tend to break it ar at work 
him dimli, and make their wai into hi imagin, and relax 
muscl in the veri moment when he is tell himself over again 
reason for hi vow. raffl, recov quickli, return to the 
us of hi odiou power—how could bulstrod wish for that? 
dead wa the imag that brought releas, and indirectli he prai 
that wai of releas, beseech that, if it were possibl, the rest 
hi dai here below might be freed from the threat of an ignomini 
would break him utterli as an instrument of god’s servic. lydgat’
opinion wa not on the side of promis that thi prayer would 
fulfil; and as the dai advanc, bulstrod felt himself 
irrit at the persist life in thi man, whom he would fain 
seen sink into the silenc of death: imperi will 
murder impuls toward thi brute life, over which will, by itself,
had no power. he said inwardli that he wa get too much worn; 
would not sit up with the patient to-night, but leav him to mr. abel,
who, if necessari, could call her husband.

at six o’clock, raffl, have had onli fit perturb snatch 
sleep, from which he wake with fresh restless and perpetu 
that he wa sink awai, bulstrod began to administ the 
accord to lydgat’s direct. at the end of half an hour or 
he call mr. abel and told her that he found himself unfit 
further watch. he must now consign the patient to her care; and 
proceed to repeat to her lydgat’s direct as to the quantiti 
each dose. mr. abel had not befor known anyth of lydgat’
prescript; she had simpli prepar and brought whatev 
order, and had done what he point out to her. she began now to 
what els she should do besid administ the opium.

“noth at present, except the offer of the soup or the soda-water:
you can come to me for further direct. unless there is 
import chang, i shall not come into the room again to-night. 
will ask your husband for help if necessari. i must go to bed earli.”

“you’ve much need, sir, i’m sure,” said mr. abel, “and to 
someth more strengthen than what you’ve done.”

bulstrod went awai now without anxieti as to what raffl might sai 
hi rave, which had taken on a mutter incoher not like 
creat ani danger belief. at ani rate he must risk thi. he 
down into the wainscot parlor first, and began to consid whether 
would not have hi hors saddl and go home by the moonlight, and 
up care for earthli consequ. then, he wish that he had 
lydgat to come again that even. perhap he might deliv 
differ opinion, and think that raffl wa get into a 
hope state. should he send for lydgat? if raffl were 
get wors, and slowli dy, bulstrod felt that he could go to 
and sleep in gratitud to provid. but wa he wors? lydgat 
come and simpli sai that he wa go on as he expect, and 
that he would by-and-by fall into a good sleep, and get well. what 
the us of send for him? bulstrod shrank from that result. no 
or opinion could hinder him from see the on probabl to be,
that raffl recov would be just the same man as befor, with 
strength as a tormentor renew, oblig him to drag awai hi wife 
spend her year apart from her friend and nativ place, carri 
alien suspicion against him in her heart.

he had sat an hour and a half in thi conflict by the firelight onli,
when a sudden thought made him rise and light the bed-candl, which 
had brought down with him. the thought wa, that he had not told mr.
abel when the dose of opium must ceas.

he took hold of the candlestick, but stood motionless for a long while.
she might alreadi have given him more than lydgat had prescrib. 
it wa excus in him, that he should forget part of an order, in 
present weari condit. he walk up-stair, candl in hand, 
know whether he should straightwai enter hi own room and go to bed,
or turn to the patient’s room and rectifi hi omiss. he paus 
the passag, with hi face turn toward raffl’s room, and he 
hear him moan and murmur. he wa not asleep, then. who could 
that lydgat’s prescript would not be better disobei 
follow, sinc there wa still no sleep?

he turn into hi own room. befor he had quit undress, mr. 
rap at the door; he open it an inch, so that he could hear 
speak low.

“if you pleas, sir, should i have no brandi nor noth to give 
poor creetur? he feel sink awai, and noth els will 
swaller—and but littl strength in it, if he did—onli the opium. and 
sai more and more he’s sink down through the earth.”

to her surpris, mr. bulstrod did not answer. a struggl wa go 
within him.

“i think he must die for want o’ support, if he goe on in that wai.
when i nurs my poor master, mr. robisson, i had to give him port-
and brandi constant, and a big glass at a time,” ad mr. abel, 
a touch of remonstr in her tone.

but again mr. bulstrod did not answer immedi, and she continu,
“it’s not a time to spare when peopl ar at death’s door, nor 
you wish it, sir, i’m sure. els i should give him our own bottl o’
rum as we keep by us. but a sitter-up so as you’ve been, and 
everyth as laid in your power—”

here a kei wa thrust through the inch of doorwai, and mr. 
said huskili, “that is the kei of the wine-cooler. you will find 
of brandi there.”

earli in the morn—about six—mr. bulstrod rose and spent some 
in prayer. doe ani on suppos that privat prayer is 
candid—necessarili goe to the root of action? privat prayer 
inaud speech, and speech is repres: who can 
himself just as he is, even in hi own reflect? bulstrod had 
yet unravel in hi thought the confus prompt of the 
four-and-twenti hour.

he listen in the passag, and could hear hard stertor breath.
then he walk out in the garden, and look at the earli rime on 
grass and fresh spring leav. when he re-enter the hous, he 
startl at the sight of mr. abel.

“how is your patient—asleep, i think?” he said, with an attempt 
cheer in hi tone.

“he’s gone veri deep, sir,” said mr. abel. “he went off 
between three and four o’clock. would you pleas to go and look at him?
i thought it no harm to leav him. my man’s gone afield, and the 
girl’s see to the kettl.”

bulstrod went up. at a glanc he knew that raffl wa not in 
sleep which bring reviv, but in the sleep which stream deeper 
deeper into the gulf of death.

he look round the room and saw a bottl with some brandi in it, 
the almost empti opium phial. he put the phial out of sight, 
carri the brandi-bottl down-stair with him, lock it again in 
wine-cooler.

while breakfast he consid whether he should ride to 
at onc, or wait for lydgat’s arriv. he decid to wait, and 
mr. abel that she might go about her work—he could watch in 
bed-chamber.

as he sat there and beheld the enemi of hi peac go 
into silenc, he felt more at rest than he had done for mani month.
hi conscienc wa sooth by the enfold wing of secreci, 
seem just then like an angel sent down for hi relief. he drew 
hi pocket-book to review variou memoranda there as to 
arrang he had project and partli carri out in the prospect 
quit middlemarch, and consid how far he would let them stand 
recal them, now that hi absenc would be brief. some economi 
he felt desir might still find a suitabl occas in hi 
withdraw from manag, and he hope still that mr. casaubon 
take a larg share in the expens of the hospit. in that wai 
moment pass, until a chang in the stertor breath wa 
enough to draw hi attent wholli to the bed, and forc him to 
of the depart life, which had onc been subservi to hi own—
he had onc been glad to find base enough for him to act on as 
would. it wa hi glad then which impel him now to be glad 
the life wa at an end.

and who could sai that the death of raffl had been hasten? who 
what would have save him?

lydgat arriv at half-past ten, in time to wit the final paus 
the breath. when he enter the room bulstrod observ a 
express in hi face, which wa not so much surpris as a 
that he had not judg correctli. he stood by the bed in silenc 
some time, with hi ey turn on the dy man, but with that 
activ of express which show that he wa carri on an 
debat.

“when did thi chang begin?” said he, look at bulstrod.

“i did not watch by him last night,” said bulstrod. “i wa over-worn,
and left him under mr. abel’s care. she said that he sank into 
between three and four o’clock. when i came in befor eight he 
nearli in thi condit.”

lydgat did not ask anoth question, but watch in silenc until 
said, “it’s all over.”

thi morn lydgat wa in a state of recov hope and freedom. 
had set out on hi work with all hi old anim, and felt 
strong enough to bear all the defici of hi marri life. and 
wa consciou that bulstrod had been a benefactor to him. but he 
uneasi about thi case. he had not expect it to termin as it 
done. yet he hardli knew how to put a question on the subject 
bulstrod without appear to insult him; and if he examin 
housekeep—why, the man wa dead. there seem to be no us 
impli that somebodi’s ignor or imprud had kill him. 
after all, he himself might be wrong.

he and bulstrod rode back to middlemarch togeth, talk of 
thing—chiefli cholera and the chanc of the reform bill in the 
of lord, and the firm resolv of the polit union. noth 
said about raffl, except that bulstrod mention the necess 
have a grave for him in lowick churchyard, and observ that, so 
as he knew, the poor man had no connect, except rigg, whom he 
state to be unfriendli toward him.

on return home lydgat had a visit from mr. farebroth. the 
had not been in the town the dai befor, but the new that there wa 
execut in lydgat’s hous had got to lowick by the even, 
been carri by mr. spicer, shoemak and parish-clerk, who had it 
hi brother, the respect bell-hanger in lowick gate. sinc 
even when lydgat had come down from the billiard room with 
vinci, mr. farebroth’s thought about him had been rather gloomi.
plai at the green dragon onc or often might have been a trifl 
anoth man; but in lydgat it wa on of sever sign that he 
get unlik hi former self. he wa begin to do thing for 
he had formerli even an excess scorn. whatev 
dissatisfact in marriag, which some silli tinkl of gossip 
given him hint of, might have to do with thi chang, mr. 
felt sure that it wa chiefli connect with the debt which were 
more and more distinctli report, and he began to fear that ani 
of lydgat’s have resourc or friend in the background must 
quit illusori. the rebuff he had met with in hi first attempt to 
lydgat’s confid, disinclin him to a second; but thi new of 
execut be actual in the hous, determin the vicar to 
hi reluct.

lydgat had just dismiss a poor patient, in whom he wa 
interest, and he came forward to put out hi hand—with an 
cheer which surpris mr. farebroth. could thi too be a 
reject of sympathi and help? never mind; the sympathi and 
should be offer.

“how ar you, lydgat? i came to see you becaus i had heard 
which made me anxiou about you,” said the vicar, in the tone of a 
brother, onli that there wa no reproach in it. thei were both 
by thi time, and lydgat answer immedi—

“i think i know what you mean. you had heard that there wa 
execut in the hous?”

“ye; is it true?”

“it wa true,” said lydgat, with an air of freedom, as if he did 
mind talk about the affair now. “but the danger is over; the debt 
paid. i am out of my difficulti now: i shall be freed from debt, 
abl, i hope, to start afresh on a better plan.”

“i am veri thank to hear it,” said the vicar, fall back in 
chair, and speak with that low-tone quick which often 
the remov of a load. “i like that better than all the new in 
‘time.’ i confess i came to you with a heavi heart.”

“thank you for come,” said lydgat, cordial. “i can enjoi 
kind all the more becaus i am happier. i have certainli been 
good deal crush. i’m afraid i shall find the bruis still 
by-and by,” he ad, smile rather sadli; “but just now i can 
feel that the tortur-screw is off.”

mr. farebroth wa silent for a moment, and then said earnestli, “
dear fellow, let me ask you on question. forgiv me if i take 
liberti.”

“i don’t believ you will ask anyth that ought to offend me.”

“then—thi is necessari to set my heart quit at rest—you have not—
you?—in order to pai your debt, incur anoth debt which mai 
you wors hereaft?”

“no,” said lydgat, color slightli. “there is no reason why i 
not tell you—sinc the fact is so—that the person to whom i am 
is bulstrod. he ha made me a veri handsom advanc—a 
pound—and he can afford to wait for repay.”

“well, that is gener,” said mr. farebroth, compel himself 
approv of the man whom he dislik. hi delic feel shrank 
dwell even in hi thought on the fact that he had alwai 
lydgat to avoid ani person entangl with bulstrod. he 
immedi, “and bulstrod must natur feel an interest in 
welfar, after you have work with him in a wai which ha 
reduc your incom instead of ad to it. i am glad to think that 
ha act accordingli.”

lydgat felt uncomfort under these kindli supposit. thei 
more distinct within him the uneasi conscious which had shown 
first dim stir onli a few hour befor, that bulstrod’s 
for hi sudden benefic follow close upon the 
indiffer might be mere selfish. he let the kindli 
pass. he could not tell the histori of the loan, but it wa 
vividli present with him than ever, as well as the fact which the 
delic ignor—that thi relat of person indebted 
bulstrod wa what he had onc been most resolv to avoid.

he began, instead of answer, to speak of hi project economi,
and of hi have come to look at hi life from a differ point 
view.

“i shall set up a surgeri,” he said. “i realli think i made a 
effort in that respect. and if rosamond will not mind, i shall take 
apprentic. i don’t like these thing, but if on carri them 
faithfulli thei ar not realli lower. i have had a sever gall 
begin with: that will make the small rub seem easi.”

poor lydgat! the “if rosamond will not mind,” which had fallen 
him involuntarili as part of hi thought, wa a signific mark of 
yoke he bore. but mr. farebroth, whose hope enter strongli 
the same current with lydgat’s, and who knew noth about him 
could now rais a melancholi presenti, left him with 
congratul.




chapter lxxi.

_clown_. . . . ’twa in the bunch of grape, where, inde,
you have a delight to sit, have you not?
_froth_. i have so: becaus it is an open room, and good for winter.
_clo_. why, veri well then: i hope here be truth.
—_measur for measur_.


five dai after the death of raffl, mr. bambridg wa stand at 
leisur under the larg archwai lead into the yard of the 
dragon. he wa not fond of solitari contempl, but he had onli 
come out of the hous, and ani human figur stand at eas under 
archwai in the earli afternoon wa as certain to attract 
as a pigeon which ha found someth worth peck at. in thi 
there wa no materi object to feed upon, but the ey of reason saw 
probabl of mental susten in the shape of gossip. mr. hopkin,
the meek-manner draper opposit, wa the first to act on thi 
vision, be the more ambiti of a littl masculin talk becaus 
custom were chiefli women. mr. bambridg wa rather curt to 
draper, feel that hopkin wa of cours glad to talk to _him_, 
that he wa not go to wast much of hi talk on hopkin. soon,
howev, there wa a small cluster of more import listen, 
were either deposit from the passer-by, or had saunter to the 
expressli to see if there were anyth go on at the green dragon;
and mr. bambridg wa find it worth hi while to sai mani 
thing about the fine stud he had been see and the purchas he 
made on a journei in the north from which he had just return.
gentlemen present were assur that when thei could show him 
to cut out a blood mare, a bai, rise four, which wa to be seen 
doncast if thei chose to go and look at it, mr. bambridg 
gratifi them by be shot “from here to hereford.” also, a pair 
black which he wa go to put into the break recal vividli to 
mind a pair which he had sold to faulkner in ’19, for a 
guinea, and which faulkner had sold for a hundr and sixti two 
later—ani gent who could disprov thi statement be offer 
privileg of call mr. bambridg by a veri ugli name until 
exercis made hi throat dry.

when the discours wa at thi point of anim, came up mr. 
hawlei. he wa not a man to compromis hi digniti by loung at 
green dragon, but happen to pass along the high street and 
bambridg on the other side, he took some of hi long stride across 
ask the horsedeal whether he had found the first-rate gig-hors 
he had engag to look for. mr. hawlei wa request to wait until 
had seen a grai select at bilklei: if that did not meet hi wish 
a hair, bambridg did not know a hors when he saw it, which seem 
be the highest conceiv unlikelihood. mr. hawlei, stand with 
back to the street, wa fix a time for look at the grai 
see it tri, when a horseman pass slowli by.

“bulstrod!” said two or three voic at onc in a low tone, on 
them, which wa the draper’s, respectfulli prefix the “mr.;” 
nobodi have more intent in thi interjectur name than if 
had said “the riverston coach” when that vehicl appear in 
distanc. mr. hawlei gave a careless glanc round at bulstrod’s back,
but as bambridg’s ey follow it he made a sarcast grimac.

“by jingo! that remind me,” he began, lower hi voic a littl, “
pick up someth els at bilklei besid your gig-hors, mr. hawlei.
i pick up a fine stori about bulstrod. do you know how he came 
hi fortun? ani gentleman want a bit of curiou inform, i 
give it him free of expens. if everybodi got their desert, 
might have had to sai hi prayer at botani bai.”

“what do you mean?” said mr. hawlei, thrust hi hand into 
pocket, and push a littl forward under the archwai. if 
should turn out to be a rascal, frank hawlei had a prophet soul.

“i had it from a parti who wa an old chum of bulstrod’s. i’ll 
you where i first pick him up,” said bambridg, with a sudden 
of hi fore-finger. “he wa at larcher’s sale, but i knew noth 
him then—he slip through my finger—wa after bulstrod, no doubt.
he tell me he can tap bulstrod to ani amount, know all hi secret.
howev, he blab to me at bilklei: he take a stiff glass. damm 
i think he meant to turn king’s evid; but he’s that sort 
brag fellow, the brag run over hedg and ditch with him, 
he’d brag of a spavin as if it ’ud fetch monei. a man should know 
to pull up.” mr. bambridg made thi remark with an air of disgust,
satisfi that hi own brag show a fine sens of the market.

“what’s the man’s name? where can he be found?” said mr. hawlei.

“as to where he is to be found, i left him to it at the saracen’s head;
but hi name is raffl.”

“raffl!” exclaim mr. hopkin. “i furnish hi funer yesterdai.
he wa buri at lowick. mr. bulstrod follow him. a veri 
funer.” there wa a strong sensat among the listen. mr.
bambridg gave an ejacul in which “brimston” wa the 
word, and mr. hawlei, knit hi brow and bend hi head forward,
exclaim, “what?—where did the man die?”

“at stone court,” said the draper. “the housekeep said he wa 
relat of the master’s. he came there ill on fridai.”

“why, it wa on wednesdai i took a glass with him,” 
bambridg.

“did ani doctor attend him?” said mr. 

“ye. mr. lydgat. mr. bulstrod sat up with him on night. he di 
third morn.”

“go on, bambridg,” said mr. hawlei, insist. “what did thi 
sai about bulstrod?”

the group had alreadi becom larger, the town-clerk’s presenc be 
guarante that someth worth listen to wa go on there; and mr.
bambridg deliv hi narr in the hear of seven. it 
mainli what we know, includ the fact about will ladislaw, with 
local color and circumst ad: it wa what bulstrod had 
the betray of—and hope to have buri forev with the corps 
raffl—it wa that haunt ghost of hi earlier life which as he 
past the archwai of the green dragon he wa trust that 
had deliv him from. ye, provid. he had not confess 
himself yet that he had done anyth in the wai of contriv to 
end; he had accept what seem to have been offer. it 
imposs to prove that he had done anyth which hasten 
departur of that man’s soul.

but thi gossip about bulstrod spread through middlemarch like 
smell of fire. mr. frank hawlei follow up hi inform by 
a clerk whom he could trust to stone court on a pretext of 
about hai, but realli to gather all that could be learn about 
and hi ill from mr. abel. in thi wai it came to hi 
that mr. garth had carri the man to stone court in hi gig; and mr.
hawlei in consequ took an opportun of see caleb, call 
hi offic to ask whether he had time to undertak an arbitr if 
were requir, and then ask him incident about raffl. 
wa betrai into no word injuri to bulstrod beyond the fact 
he wa forc to admit, that he had given up act for him within 
last week. mr hawlei drew hi infer, and feel convinc 
raffl had told hi stori to garth, and that garth had given 
bulstrod’s affair in consequ, said so a few hour later to mr.
toller. the statement wa pass on until it had quit lost the 
of an infer, and wa taken as inform come straight 
garth, so that even a dilig historian might have conclud caleb 
be the chief publish of bulstrod’s misdemeanor.

mr. hawlei wa not slow to perceiv that there wa no handl for 
law either in the revel made by raffl or in the 
of hi death. he had himself ridden to lowick villag that he 
look at the regist and talk over the whole matter with mr.
farebroth, who wa not more surpris than the lawyer that an 
secret should have come to light about bulstrod, though he had 
had justic enough in him to hinder hi antipathi from turn 
conclus. but while thei were talk anoth combin 
silent go forward in mr. farebroth’s mind, which 
what wa soon to be loudli spoken of in middlemarch as a 
“put of two and two togeth.” with the reason which 
bulstrod in dread of raffl there flash the thought that the 
might have someth to do with hi munific toward hi 
man; and though he resist the suggest that it had been 
accept in ani wai as a bribe, he had a forebod that 
complic of thing might be of malign effect on lydgat’
reput. he perceiv that mr. hawlei knew noth at present of 
sudden relief from debt, and he himself wa care to glide awai 
all approach toward the subject.

“well,” he said, with a deep breath, want to wind up the 
discuss of what might have been, though noth could be 
proven, “it is a strang stori. so our mercuri ladislaw ha a 
genealog! a high-spirit young ladi and a music polish patriot 
a like enough stock for him to spring from, but i should never 
suspect a graft of the jew pawnbrok. howev, there’s no 
what a mixtur will turn out beforehand. some sort of dirt serv 
clarifi.”

“it’s just what i should have expect,” said mr. hawlei, mount 
hors. “ani curs alien blood, jew, corsican, or gypsi.”

“i know he’s on of your black sheep, hawlei. but he is realli 
disinterest, unworldli fellow,” said mr. farebroth, smile.

“ay, ay, that is your whiggish twist,” said mr. hawlei, who had been 
the habit of sai apologet that farebroth wa such a 
pleasant good-heart fellow you would mistak him for a tori.

mr. hawlei rode home without think of lydgat’s attend 
raffl in ani other light than as a piec of evid on the side 
bulstrod. but the new that lydgat had all at onc becom abl 
onli to get rid of the execut in hi hous but to pai all hi 
in middlemarch wa spread fast, gather round it conjectur 
comment which gave it new bodi and impetu, and soon fill the 
of other person besid mr. hawlei, who were not slow to see 
signific relat between thi sudden command of monei 
bulstrod’s desir to stifl the scandal of raffl. that the 
came from bulstrod would infal have been guess even if 
had been no direct evid of it; for it had beforehand enter 
the gossip about lydgat’s affair, that neither hi father-in-law 
hi own famili would do anyth for him, and direct evid 
furnish not onli by a clerk at the bank, but by innoc mr.
bulstrod herself, who mention the loan to mr. plymdal, 
mention it to her daughter-in-law of the hous of toller, 
mention it gener. the busi wa felt to be so public 
import that it requir dinner to feed it, and mani 
were just then issu and accept on the strength of thi 
concern bulstrod and lydgat; wive, widow, and singl ladi 
their work and went out to tea often than usual; and all 
convivi, from the green dragon to dollop’s, gather a zest 
could not be won from the question whether the lord would throw 
the reform bill.

for hardli anybodi doubt that some scandal reason or other wa 
the bottom of bulstrod’s liber to lydgat. mr. hawlei inde, 
the first instanc, invit a select parti, includ the 
physician, with mr toller and mr. wrench, expressli to hold a 
discuss as to the probabl of raffl’s ill, recit 
them all the particular which had been gather from mr. abel 
connect with lydgat’s certif, that the death wa due 
delirium tremen; and the medic gentlemen, who all 
undisturbedli on the old path in relat to thi diseas, 
that thei could see noth in these particular which could 
transform into a posit ground of suspicion. but the moral 
of suspicion remain: the strong motiv bulstrod clearli had 
wish to be rid of raffl, and the fact that at thi critic 
he had given lydgat the help which he must for some time have 
the need for; the disposit, moreov, to believ that 
would be unscrupul, and the absenc of ani indisposit to 
that lydgat might be as easili bribe as other haughti-mind men 
thei have found themselv in want of monei. even if the monei had 
given mere to make him hold hi tongu about the scandal 
bulstrod’s earlier life, the fact threw an odiou light on lydgat,
who had long been sneer at as make himself subservi to 
banker for the sake of work himself into predomin, 
discredit the elder member of hi profess. henc, in spite 
the neg as to ani direct sign of guilt in relat to the death 
stone court, mr. hawlei’s select parti broke up with the sens that 
affair had “an ugli look.”

but thi vagu convict of indetermin guilt, which wa enough 
keep up much head-shake and bite innuendo even among 
profession senior, had for the gener mind all the superior 
of mysteri over fact. everybodi like better to conjectur how 
thing wa, than simpli to know it; for conjectur soon becam 
confid than knowledg, and had a more liber allow for 
incompat. even the more definit scandal concern bulstrod’
earlier life wa, for some mind, melt into the mass of mysteri, 
so much live metal to be pour out in dialogu, and to take 
fantast shape as heaven pleas.

thi wa the tone of thought chiefli sanction by mr. dollop, 
spirit landladi of the tankard in slaughter lane, who had often 
resist the shallow pragmat of custom dispos to think that 
report from the outer world were of equal forc with what had “
up” in her mind. how it had been brought to her she didn’t know, but 
wa there befor her as if it had been “score with the chalk on 
chimnei-board—” as bulstrod should sai, “hi insid wa _that black_
as if the hair of hi head know the thought of hi heart, he’d 
’em up by the root.”

“that’s odd,” said mr. limp, a medit shoemak, with weak ey 
a pipe voic. “why, i read in the ‘trumpet’ that wa what the duke 
wellington said when he turn hi coat and went over to the roman.”

“veri like,” said mr. dollop. “if on raskil said it, it’s 
reason why anoth should. but hypo_crite_ as he’s been, and 
thing with that high hand, as there wa no parson i’ the countri 
enough for him, he wa forc to take old harri into hi counsel, 
old harri’s been too mani for him.”

“ay, ay, he’s a ’complic you can’t send out o’ the countri,” said mr.
crabb, the glazier, who gather much new and grope among it dimli.
“but by what i can make out, there’s them sai bulstrod wa 
run awai, for fear o’ be found out, befor now.”

“he’ll be drove awai, whether or no,” said mr. dill, the barber, 
had just drop in. “i shave fletcher, hawlei’s clerk, 
morn—he’s got a bad finger—and he sai thei’re all of on mind 
get rid of bulstrod. mr. thesig is turn against him, and want 
out o’ the parish. and there’s gentlemen in thi town sai thei’d 
soon dine with a fellow from the hulk. ‘and a deal sooner i would,’
sai fletcher; ‘for what’s more against on’s stomach than a man 
and make himself bad compani with hi religion, and give out as 
ten command ar not enough for him, and all the while he’s 
than half the men at the tread-mill?’ fletcher said so himself.”

“it’ll be a bad thing for the town though, if bulstrod’s monei 
out of it,” said mr. limp, quaveringli.

“ah, there’s better folk spend their monei wors,” said a firm-
dyer, whose crimson hand look out of keep with hi good-
face.

“but he won’t keep hi monei, by what i can make out,” said 
glazier. “don’t thei sai as there’s somebodi can strip it off him? 
what i can understan’, thei could take everi penni off him, if 
went to law.”

“no such thing!” said the barber, who felt himself a littl abov 
compani at dollop’s, but like it none the wors. “fletcher sai it’
no such thing. he sai thei might prove over and over again whose 
thi young ladislaw wa, and thei’d do no more than if thei prove 
came out of the fen—he couldn’t touch a penni.”

“look you there now!” said mr. dollop, indignantli. “i thank the 
he took my children to himself, if that’s all the law can do for 
motherless. then by that, it’s o’ no us who your father and mother is.
but as to listen to what on lawyer sai without ask anoth—
wonder at a man o’ your clever, mr. dill. it’s well known there’
alwai two side, if no more; els who’d go to law, i should like 
know? it’s a poor tale, with all the law as there is up and down, 
it’s no us prove whose child you ar. fletcher mai sai that if 
like, but i sai, don’t fletcher _me_!”

mr. dill affect to laugh in a complimentari wai at mr. dollop, as 
woman who wa more than a match for the lawyer; be dispos 
submit to much twit from a landladi who had a long score 
him.

“if thei come to law, and it’s all true as folk sai, there’s 
to be look to nor monei,” said the glazier. “there’s thi 
creetur as is dead and gone; by what i can make out, he’d seen the 
when he wa a deal finer gentleman nor bulstrod.”

“finer gentleman! i’ll warrant him,” said mr. dollop; “and a 
personabl man, by what i can hear. as i said when mr. baldwin, 
tax-gather, come in, a-stand where you sit, and sai, ‘
got all hi monei as he brought into thi town by thiev 
swindl,’—i said, ‘you don’t make me no wiser, mr. baldwin: it’s 
my blood a-creep to look at him ever sin’ here he came 
slaughter lane a-want to bui the hous over my head: folk don’
look the color o’ the dough-tub and stare at you as if thei want 
see into your backbon for nothingk.’ that wa what i said, and mr.
baldwin can bear me wit.”

“and in the right of it too,” said mr. crabb. “for by what i can 
out, thi raffl, as thei call him, wa a lusti, fresh-color man 
you’d wish to see, and the best o’ compani—though dead he li 
lowick churchyard sure enough; and by what i can understan’, there’
them know more than thei _should_ know about how he got there.”

“i’ll believ you!” said mr. dollop, with a touch of scorn at mr.
crabb’s appar dim. “when a man’s been ’tice to a lone hous,
and there’s them can pai for hospit and nurs for half 
countri-side choos to be sitter-up night and dai, and nobodi to 
near but a doctor as is known to stick at nothingk, and as poor as 
can hang togeth, and after that so flush o’ monei as he can pai 
mr. byle the butcher as hi bill ha been run on for the best o’
joint sinc last michaelma wa a twelvemonth—i don’t want anybodi 
come and tell me as there’s been more go on nor the prayer-book’
got a servic for—i don’t want to stand wink and blink 
think.”

mr. dollop look round with the air of a landladi accustom 
domin her compani. there wa a choru of adhes from the 
courag; but mr. limp, after take a draught, place hi flat 
togeth and press them hard between hi knee, look down at 
with blear-ei contempl, as if the scorch power of mr.
dollop’s speech had quit dri up and nullifi hi wit until 
could be brought round again by further moistur.

“why shouldn’t thei dig the man up and have the crowner?” said 
dyer. “it’s been done mani and mani’s the time. if there’s been 
plai thei might find it out.”

“not thei, mr. jona!” said mr dollop, emphat. “i know 
doctor ar. thei’re a deal too cun to be found out. and 
doctor lydgat that’s been for cut up everybodi befor the 
wa well out o’ their bodi—it’s plain enough what us he want to 
o’ look into respect peopl’s insid. he know drug, you 
be sure, as you can neither smell nor see, neither befor thei’
swallow nor after. why, i’ve seen drop myself order by 
gambit, as is our club doctor and a good charikt, and ha 
more live children into the world nor ever anoth i’ middlemarch—i 
i’ve seen drop myself as made no differ whether thei wa in 
glass or out, and yet have gripe you the next dai. so i’ll leav 
own sens to judg. don’t tell me! all i sai is, it’s a merci 
didn’t take thi doctor lydgat on to our club. there’s mani a mother’
child might ha’ ru it.”

the head of thi discuss at “dollop’s” had been the common 
among all class in the town, had been carri to lowick parsonag 
on side and to tipton grang on the other, had come fulli to the 
of the vinci famili, and had been discuss with sad refer to “
harriet” by all mr. bulstrod’s friend, befor lydgat 
distinctli why peopl were look strang at him, and 
bulstrod himself suspect the betray of hi secret. he had 
been accustom to veri cordial relat with hi neighbor, and 
he could not miss the sign of cordial; moreov, he had been 
journei on busi of variou kind, have now made up hi mind 
he need not quit middlemarch, and feel abl consequ 
determin on matter which he had befor left in suspens.

“we will make a journei to cheltenham in the cours of a month or two,”
he had said to hi wife. “there ar great spiritu advantag to 
had in that town along with the air and the water, and six week 
will be emin refresh to us.”

he realli believ in the spiritu advantag, and meant that hi 
henceforth should be the more devot becaus of those later sin 
he repres to himself as hypothet, prai hypothet 
their pardon:—“if i have herein transgress.”

as to the hospit, he avoid sai anyth further to lydgat,
fear to manifest a too sudden chang of plan immedi on 
death of raffl. in hi secret soul he believ that lydgat 
hi order to have been intention disobei, and suspect thi 
must also suspect a motiv. but noth had been betrai to him as 
the histori of raffl, and bulstrod wa anxiou not to do 
which would give emphasi to hi undefin suspicion. as to 
certainti that a particular method of treatment would either save 
kill, lydgat himself wa constantli argu against such dogmat; 
had no right to speak, and he had everi motiv for be silent. 
bulstrod felt himself providenti secur. the onli incid he 
strongli winc under had been an occasion encount with 
garth, who, howev, had rais hi hat with mild graviti.

meanwhil, on the part of the princip townsmen a strong 
wa grow against him.

a meet wa to be held in the town-hall on a sanitari question 
had risen into press import by the occurr of a cholera 
in the town. sinc the act of parliament, which had been 
pass, author assess for sanitari measur, there had been 
board for the superintend of such measur appoint 
middlemarch, and much cleans and prepar had been concur 
by whig and tori. the question now wa, whether a piec of 
outsid the town should be secur as a burial-ground by mean 
assess or by privat subscript. the meet wa to be open, 
almost everybodi of import in the town wa expect to be there.

mr. bulstrod wa a member of the board, and just befor twelv o’
he start from the bank with the intent of urg the plan 
privat subscript. under the hesit of hi project, he had 
some time kept himself in the background, and he felt that he 
thi morn resum hi old posit as a man of action and 
in the public affair of the town where he expect to end hi dai.
among the variou person go in the same direct, he saw lydgat;
thei join, talk over the object of the meet, and enter 
togeth.

it seem that everybodi of mark had been earlier than thei. but 
were still space left near the head of the larg central tabl, 
thei made their wai thither. mr. farebroth sat opposit, not far 
mr. hawlei; all the medic men were there; mr. thesig wa in 
chair, and mr. brook of tipton wa on hi right hand.

lydgat notic a peculiar interchang of glanc when he and 
took their seat.

after the busi had been fulli open by the chairman, who 
out the advantag of purchas by subscript a piec of 
larg enough to be ultim us as a gener cemeteri, mr.
bulstrod, whose rather high-pitch but subdu and fluent voic 
town wa us to at meet of thi sort, rose and ask leav 
deliv hi opinion. lydgat could see again the peculiar 
of glanc befor mr. hawlei start up, and said in hi firm 
voic, “mr. chairman, i request that befor ani on deliv 
opinion on thi point i mai be permit to speak on a question 
public feel, which not onli by myself, but by mani 
present, is regard as preliminari.”

mr. hawlei’s mode of speech, even when public decorum repress 
“aw languag,” wa formid in it curt and self-possess.
mr. thesig sanction the request, mr. bulstrod sat down, and mr.
hawlei continu.

“in what i have to sai, mr. chairman, i am not speak simpli on 
own behalf: i am speak with the concurr and at the 
request of no fewer than eight of my fellow-townsmen, who 
immedi around us. it is our unit sentiment that mr. 
should be call upon—and i do now call upon him—to resign 
posit which he hold not simpli as a tax-payer, but as a 
among gentlemen. there ar practic and there ar act which, ow 
circumst, the law cannot visit, though thei mai be wors than 
thing which ar legal punish. honest men and gentlemen, if 
don’t want the compani of peopl who perpetr such act, have got 
defend themselv as thei best can, and that is what i and the 
whom i mai call my client in thi affair ar determin to do. i don’
sai that mr. bulstrod ha been guilti of shame act, but i 
upon him either publicli to deni and confut the scandal 
made against him by a man now dead, and who di in hi hous—
statement that he wa for mani year engag in nefari practic,
and that he won hi fortun by dishonest procedur—or els to 
from posit which could onli have been allow him as a 
among gentlemen.”

all ey in the room were turn on mr. bulstrod, who, sinc the 
mention of hi name, had been go through a crisi of feel 
too violent for hi delic frame to support. lydgat, who himself 
undergo a shock as from the terribl practic interpret 
some faint auguri, felt, nevertheless, that hi own movement 
resent hatr wa check by that instinct of the healer 
think first of bring rescu or relief to the suffer, when 
look at the shrunken miseri of bulstrod’s livid face.

the quick vision that hi life wa after all a failur, that he wa 
dishonor man, and must quail befor the glanc of those toward 
he had habitu assum the attitud of a reprov—that god 
disown him befor men and left him unscreen to the triumphant 
of those who were glad to have their hatr justifi—the sens 
utter futil in that equivoc with hi conscienc in deal 
the life of hi accomplic, an equivoc which now turn 
upon him with the full-grown fang of a discov lie:—all thi 
through him like the agoni of terror which fail to kill, and 
the ear still open to the return wave of execr. the 
sens of exposur after the re-establish sens of safeti came—not 
the coars organ of a crimin, but to the suscept nerv 
a man whose intensest be lai in such masteri and predomin as 
condit of hi life had shape for him.

but in that intens be lai the strength of reaction. through all 
bodili infirm there ran a tenaci nerv of 
self-preserv will, which had continu leap out like a flame,
scatter all doctrin fear, and which, even while he sat an 
of compass for the merci, wa begin to stir and glow 
hi ashi pale. befor the last word were out of mr. hawlei’
mouth, bulstrod felt that he should answer, and that hi answer 
be a retort. he dare not get up and sai, “i am not guilti, the 
stori is fals”—even if he had dare thi, it would have seem to him,
under hi present keen sens of betray, as vain as to pull, 
cover to hi naked, a frail rag which would rend at everi 
strain.

for a few moment there wa total silenc, while everi man in the 
wa look at bulstrod. he sat perfectli still, lean hard 
the back of hi chair; he could not ventur to rise, and when he 
to speak he press hi hand upon the seat on each side of him. 
hi voic wa perfectli audibl, though hoarser than usual, and 
word were distinctli pronounc, though he paus between sentenc 
if short of breath. he said, turn first toward mr. thesig, 
then look at mr. hawlei—

“i protest befor you, sir, as a christian minist, against 
sanction of proceed toward me which ar dictat by 
hatr. those who ar hostil to me ar glad to believ ani 
utter by a loos tongu against me. and their conscienc 
strict against me. sai that the evil-speak of which i am to be 
the victim accus me of malpractic—” here bulstrod’s voic rose 
took on a more bite accent, till it seem a low cry—“who shall be 
accus? not men whose own live ar unchristian, nai, scandal—
men who themselv us low instrument to carri out their end—
profess is a tissu of chicaneri—who have been spend their 
on their own sensual enjoy, while i have been devot mine 
advanc the best object with regard to thi life and the next.”

after the word chicaneri there wa a grow nois, half of murmur 
half of hiss, while four person start up at onc—mr. hawlei, mr.
toller, mr. chich, and mr. hackbutt; but mr. hawlei’s outburst 
instantan, and left the other behind in silenc.

“if you mean me, sir, i call you and everi on els to the 
of my profession life. as to christian or unchristian, i 
your cant palav christian; and as to the wai in which 
spend my incom, it is not my principl to maintain thiev and 
offspr of their due inherit in order to support religion and 
myself up as a saintli killjoi. i affect no nice of conscienc—
have not found ani nice standard necessari yet to measur your 
by, sir. and i again call upon you to enter into 
explan concern the scandal against you, or els to 
from post in which we at ani rate declin you as a colleagu. i sai,
sir, we declin to co-oper with a man whose charact is not 
from infam light cast upon it, not onli by report but by 
action.”

“allow me, mr. hawlei,” said the chairman; and mr. hawlei, 
fume, bow half impati, and sat down with hi hand thrust 
in hi pocket.

“mr. bulstrod, it is not desir, i think, to prolong the 
discuss,” said mr. thesig, turn to the pallid trembl man; “
must so far concur with what ha fallen from mr. hawlei in 
of a gener feel, as to think it due to your christian 
that you should clear yourself, if possibl, from unhappi aspers. 
for my part should be will to give you full opportun and hear.
but i must sai that your present attitud is painfulli 
with those principl which you have sought to identifi yourself with,
and for the honor of which i am bound to care. i recommend you 
present, as your clergyman, and on who hope for your reinstat 
respect, to quit the room, and avoid further hindranc to busi.”

bulstrod, after a moment’s hesit, took hi hat from the floor 
slowli rose, but he grasp the corner of the chair so totteringli 
lydgat felt sure there wa not strength enough in him to walk 
without support. what could he do? he could not see a man sink close 
him for want of help. he rose and gave hi arm to bulstrod, and 
that wai led him out of the room; yet thi act, which might have 
on of gentl duti and pure compass, wa at thi moment 
bitter to him. it seem as if he were put hi sign-manual to 
associ of himself with bulstrod, of which he now saw the 
mean as it must have present itself to other mind. he now 
the convict that thi man who wa lean tremblingli on hi arm,
had given him the thousand pound as a bribe, and that somehow 
treatment of raffl had been tamper with from an evil motiv. 
infer were close link enough; the town knew of the loan,
believ it to be a bribe, and believ that he took it as a bribe.

poor lydgat, hi mind struggl under the terribl clutch of 
revel, wa all the while moral forc to take mr. bulstrod 
the bank, send a man off for hi carriag, and wait to accompani 
home.

meanwhil the busi of the meet wa despatch, and fring 
into eager discuss among variou group concern thi affair 
bulstrod—and lydgat.

mr. brook, who had befor heard onli imperfect hint of it, and 
veri uneasi that he had “gone a littl too far” in 
bulstrod, now got himself fulli inform, and felt some 
sad in talk to mr. farebroth about the ugli light in 
lydgat had come to be regard. mr. farebroth wa go to walk 
to lowick.

“step into my carriag,” said mr. brook. “i am go round to see mr.
casaubon. she wa to come back from yorkshir last night. she will 
to see me, you know.”

so thei drove along, mr. brook chat with good-natur hope 
there had not realli been anyth black in lydgat’s behavior—a 
fellow whom he had seen to be quit abov the common mark, when 
brought a letter from hi uncl sir godwin. mr. farebroth 
littl: he wa deepli mourn: with a keen percept of 
weak, he could not be confid that under the pressur 
humili need lydgat had not fallen below himself.

when the carriag drove up to the gate of the manor, dorothea wa 
on the gravel, and came to greet them.

“well, my dear,” said mr. brook, “we have just come from a meet—
sanitari meet, you know.”

“wa mr. lydgat there?” said dorothea, who look full of health 
anim, and stood with her head bare under the gleam 
light. “i want to see him and have a great consult with him 
the hospit. i have engag with mr. bulstrod to do so.”

“oh, my dear,” said mr. brook, “we have been hear bad new—
new, you know.”

thei walk through the garden toward the churchyard gate, mr.
farebroth want to go on to the parsonag; and dorothea heard 
whole sad stori.

she listen with deep interest, and beg to hear twice over 
fact and impress concern lydgat. after a short silenc,
paus at the churchyard gate, and address mr. farebroth, 
said energet—

“you don’t believ that mr. lydgat is guilti of anyth base? i 
not believ it. let us find out the truth and clear him!”




book viii.
sunset and sunris.




chapter lxxii.

full soul ar doubl mirror, make 
an endless vista of fair thing befor,
repeat thing behind.


dorothea’s impetu generos, which would have leap at onc to 
vindic of lydgat from the suspicion of have accept monei as 
bribe, underw a melancholi check when she came to consid all 
circumst of the case by the light of mr. farebroth’s experi.

“it is a delic matter to touch,” he said. “how can we begin 
inquir into it? it must be either publicli by set the 
and coron to work, or privat by question lydgat. as to 
first proceed there is no solid ground to go upon, els hawlei 
have adopt it; and as to open the subject with lydgat, i 
i should shrink from it. he would probabl take it as a deadli insult.
i have more than onc experienc the difficulti of speak to him 
person matter. and—on should know the truth about hi 
beforehand, to feel veri confid of a good result.”

“i feel convinc that hi conduct ha not been guilti: i believ 
peopl ar almost alwai better than their neighbor think thei ar,”
said dorothea. some of her intensest experi in the last two 
had set her mind strongli in opposit to ani unfavor 
of other; and for the first time she felt rather discont with mr.
farebroth. she dislik thi cautiou weigh of consequ,
instead of an ardent faith in effort of justic and merci, which 
conquer by their emot forc. two dai afterward, he wa dine 
the manor with her uncl and the chettam, and when the dessert 
stand uneaten, the servant were out of the room, and mr. brook 
nod in a nap, she return to the subject with renew vivac.

“mr. lydgat would understand that if hi friend hear a calumni 
him their first wish must be to justifi him. what do we live for, if 
is not to make life less difficult to each other? i cannot 
indiffer to the troubl of a man who advis me in _my_ troubl,
and attend me in my ill.”

dorothea’s tone and manner were not more energet than thei had 
when she wa at the head of her uncl’s tabl nearli three 
befor, and her experi sinc had given her more right to express 
decid opinion. but sir jame chettam wa no longer the diffid 
acquiesc suitor: he wa the anxiou brother-in-law, with a 
admir for hi sister, but with a constant alarm lest she 
fall under some new illus almost as bad as marri casaubon. 
smile much less; when he said “exactli” it wa more often 
introduct to a dissenti opinion than in those submiss 
dai; and dorothea found to her surpris that she had to resolv not 
be afraid of him—all the more becaus he wa realli her best friend. 
disagre with her now.

“but, dorothea,” he said, remonstrantli, “you can’t undertak to 
a man’s life for him in that wai. lydgat must know—at least he 
soon come to know how he stand. if he can clear himself, he will. 
must act for himself.”

“i think hi friend must wait till thei find an opportun,” 
mr. farebroth. “it is possibl—i have often felt so much weak 
myself that i can conceiv even a man of honor disposit, such 
i have alwai believ lydgat to be, succumb to such a 
as that of accept monei which wa offer more or less indirectli 
a bribe to insur hi silenc about scandal fact long gone by. 
sai, i can conceiv thi, if he were under the pressur of 
circumst—if he had been harass as i feel sure lydgat ha been.
i would not believ anyth wors of him except under stringent proof.
but there is the terribl nemesi follow on some error, that it 
alwai possibl for those who like it to interpret them into a crime:
there is no proof in favor of the man outsid hi own conscious 
assert.”

“oh, how cruel!” said dorothea, clasp her hand. “and would you 
like to be the on person who believ in that man’s innoc, if 
rest of the world beli him? besid, there is a man’s 
beforehand to speak for him.”

“but, my dear mr. casaubon,” said mr. farebroth, smile gentli 
her ardor, “charact is not cut in marbl—it is not someth 
and unalter. it is someth live and chang, and mai 
diseas as our bodi do.”

“then it mai be rescu and heal,” said dorothea “i should not 
afraid of ask mr. lydgat to tell me the truth, that i might 
him. why should i be afraid? now that i am not to have the land, jame,
i might do as mr. bulstrod propos, and take hi place in 
for the hospit; and i have to consult mr. lydgat, to know 
what ar the prospect of do good by keep up the present plan.
there is the best opportun in the world for me to ask for 
confid; and he would be abl to tell me thing which might make 
the circumst clear. then we would all stand by him and bring 
out of hi troubl. peopl glorifi all sort of braveri except 
braveri thei might show on behalf of their nearest neighbor.”
dorothea’s ey had a moist bright in them, and the chang 
of her voic rous her uncl, who began to listen.

“it is true that a woman mai ventur on some effort of sympathi 
would hardli succe if we men undertook them,” said mr. farebroth,
almost convert by dorothea’s ardor.

“sure, a woman is bound to be cautiou and listen to those who 
the world better than she doe.” said sir jame, with hi littl frown.
“whatev you do in the end, dorothea, you should realli keep back 
present, and not volunt ani meddl with thi bulstrod busi.
we don’t know yet what mai turn up. you must agre with me?” he end,
look at mr. farebroth.

“i do think it would be better to wait,” said the latter.

“ye, ye, my dear,” said mr. brook, not quit know at what 
the discuss had arriv, but come up to it with a 
which wa gener appropri. “it is easi to go too far, you know.
you must not let your idea run awai with you. and as to be in 
hurri to put monei into scheme—it won’t do, you know. garth ha 
me in uncommonli with repair, drain, that sort of thing: i’
uncommonli out of pocket with on thing or anoth. i must pull up. 
for you, chettam, you ar spend a fortun on those oak fenc 
your demesn.”

dorothea, submit uneasili to thi discourag, went with 
into the librari, which wa her usual draw-room.

“now, dodo, do listen to what jame sai,” said celia, “els you 
be get into a scrape. you alwai did, and you alwai will, when 
set about do as you pleas. and i think it is a merci now after 
that you have got jame to think for you. he let you have your plan,
onli he hinder you from be taken in. and that is the good of 
a brother instead of a husband. a husband would not let you have 
plan.”

“as if i want a husband!” said dorothea. “i onli want not to have 
feel check at everi turn.” mr. casaubon wa still 
enough to burst into angri tear.

“now, realli, dodo,” said celia, with rather a deeper guttur 
usual, “you _ar_ contradictori: first on thing and then anoth. 
us to submit to mr. casaubon quit shamefulli: i think you would 
given up ever come to see me if he had ask you.”

“of cours i submit to him, becaus it wa my duti; it wa 
feel for him,” said dorothea, look through the prism of 
tear.

“then why can’t you think it your duti to submit a littl to what 
wish?” said celia, with a sens of stringenc in her argument.
“becaus he onli wish what is for your own good. and, of cours, 
know best about everyth, except what women know better.” 
laugh and forgot her tear.

“well, i mean about babi and those thing,” explain celia. “
should not give up to jame when i knew he wa wrong, as you us to 
to mr. casaubon.”




chapter lxxiii.

piti the laden on; thi wander 
mai visit you and me.


when lydgat had allai mr. bulstrod’s anxieti by tell her 
her husband had been seiz with faint at the meet, but that 
trust soon to see him better and would call again the next dai,
unless she sent for him earlier, he went directli home, got on 
hors, and rode three mile out of the town for the sake of be 
of reach.

he felt himself becom violent and unreason as if rage 
the pain of sting: he wa readi to curs the dai on which he had 
to middlemarch. everyth that bad happen to him there seem a 
prepar for thi hate fatal, which had come as a blight 
hi honor ambit, and must make even peopl who had onli 
standard regard hi reput as irrevoc damag. in such 
a man can hardli escap be unlov. lydgat thought of himself 
the suffer, and of other as the agent who had injur hi lot. 
had meant everyth to turn out differ; and other had 
themselv into hi life and thwart hi purpos. hi marriag 
an unmitig calam; and he wa afraid of go to rosamond 
he had vent himself in thi solitari rage, lest the mere sight of 
should exasper him and make him behav unwarrant. there 
episod in most men’s live in which their highest qualiti can 
cast a deter shadow over the object that fill their inward vision:
lydgat’s tenderhearted wa present just then onli as a dread 
he should offend against it, not as an emot that swai him 
tender. for he wa veri miser. onli those who know 
supremaci of the intellectu life—the life which ha a seed 
ennobl thought and purpos within it—can understand the grief of 
who fall from that seren activ into the absorb soul-
struggl with worldli annoy.

how wa he to live on without vindic himself among peopl 
suspect him of base? how could he go silent awai 
middlemarch as if he were retreat befor a just condemn? 
yet how wa he to set about vindic himself?

for that scene at the meet, which he had just wit, although 
had told him no particular, had been enough to make hi own 
thoroughli clear to him. bulstrod had been in dread of 
disclosur on the part of raffl. lydgat could now construct all 
probabl of the case. “he wa afraid of some betray in 
hear: all he want wa to bind me to him by a strong oblig:
that wa why he pass on a sudden from hard to liber. and 
mai have tamper with the patient—he mai have disobei my order. 
fear he did. but whether he did or not, the world believ that 
somehow or other poison the man and that i wink at the crime, if 
didn’t help in it. and yet—and yet he mai not be guilti of the 
offenc; and it is just possibl that the chang toward me mai 
been a genuin relent—the effect of second thought such as 
alleg. what we call the ‘just possibl’ is sometim true and 
thing we find it easier to believ is grossli fals. in hi 
deal with thi man bulstrod mai have kept hi hand pure, in 
of my suspicion to the contrari.”

there wa a benumb cruelti in hi posit. even if he 
everi other consider than that of justifi himself—if he 
shrug, cold glanc, and avoid as an accus, and made a 
statement of all the fact as he knew them, who would be convinc? 
would be plai the part of a fool to offer hi own testimoni 
behalf of himself, and sai, “i did not take the monei as a bribe.” 
circumst would alwai be stronger than hi assert. and besid,
to come forward and tell everyth about himself must 
declar about bulstrod which would darken the suspicion 
other against him. he must tell that he had not known of raffl’
exist when he first mention hi press need of monei 
bulstrod, and that he took the monei innoc as a result of 
commun, not know that a new motiv for the loan might 
arisen on hi be call in to thi man. and after all, the 
of bulstrod’s motiv might be unjust.

but then came the question whether he should have act in 
the same wai if he had not taken the monei? certainli, if raffl 
continu aliv and suscept of further treatment when he arriv,
and he had then imagin ani disobedi to hi order on the part 
bulstrod, he would have made a strict inquiri, and if hi 
had been verifi he would have thrown up the case, in spite of 
recent heavi oblig. but if he had not receiv ani monei—
bulstrod had never revok hi cold recommend of bankruptci—
he, lydgat, have abstain from all inquiri even on find the 
dead?—would the shrink from an insult to bulstrod—would 
dubious of all medic treatment and the argument that hi 
treatment would pass for the wrong with most member of 
profess—have had just the same forc or signific with him?

that wa the uneasi corner of lydgat’s conscious while he 
review the fact and resist all reproach. if he had 
independ, thi matter of a patient’s treatment and the distinct 
that he must do or see done that which he believ best for the 
commit to him, would have been the point on which he would have 
the sturdiest. as it wa, he had rest in the consider 
disobedi to hi order, howev it might have arisen, could not 
consid a crime, that in the domin opinion obedi to 
order wa just as like to be fatal, and that the affair wa 
on of etiquett. wherea, again and again, in hi time of freedom, 
had denounc the pervers of patholog doubt into moral doubt 
had said—“the purest experi in treatment mai still 
conscienti: my busi is to take care of life, and to do the 
i can think of for it. scienc is properli more scrupul than dogma.
dogma give a charter to mistak, but the veri breath of scienc is 
contest with mistak, and must keep the conscienc aliv.” ala! 
scientif conscienc had got into the debas compani of 
oblig and selfish respect.

“is there a medic man of them all in middlemarch who would 
himself as i do?” said poor lydgat, with a renew outburst 
rebellion against the oppress of hi lot. “and yet thei will 
feel warrant in make a wide space between me and them, as if i 
a leper! my practic and my reput ar utterli damn—i can 
that. even if i could be clear by valid evid, it would 
littl differ to the bless world here. i have been set down 
taint and should be cheapen to them all the same.”

alreadi there had been abund sign which had hitherto puzzl him,
that just when he had been pai off hi debt and get 
on hi feet, the townsmen were avoid him or look strang 
him, and in two instanc it came to hi knowledg that patient of 
had call in anoth practition. the reason were too plain now. 
gener black-ball had begun.

no wonder that in lydgat’s energet natur the sens of a 
misconstruct easili turn into a dog resist. the scowl 
occasion show itself on hi squar brow wa not a 
accid. alreadi when he wa re-enter the town after that 
taken in the first hour of sting pain, he wa set hi mind 
remain in middlemarch in spite of the worst that could be 
against him. he would not retreat befor calumni, as if he submit 
it. he would face it to the utmost, and no act of hi should show 
he wa afraid. it belong to the generos as well as defiant 
of hi natur that he resolv not to shrink from show to the 
hi sens of oblig to bulstrod. it wa true that the 
with thi man had been fatal to him—true that if he had had 
thousand pound still in hi hand with all hi debt unpaid he 
have return the monei to bulstrod, and taken beggari rather than 
rescu which had been sulli with the suspicion of a bribe (for,
rememb, he wa on of the proudest among the son 
men)—nevertheless, he would not turn awai from thi 
fellow-mortal whose aid he had us, and make a piti effort to 
acquitt for himself by howl against anoth. “i shall do as 
think right, and explain to nobodi. thei will try to starv me out,
but—” he wa go on with an obstin resolv, but he wa 
near home, and the thought of rosamond urg itself again into 
chief place from which it had been thrust by the agon struggl 
wound honor and pride.

how would rosamond take it all? here wa anoth weight of chain 
drag, and poor lydgat wa in a bad mood for bear her dumb masteri.
he had no impuls to tell her the troubl which must soon be common 
them both. he prefer wait for the incident disclosur 
event must soon bring about.




chapter lxxiv.

“mercifulli grant that we mai grow ag togeth.”
—book of tobit: _marriag prayer_.


in middlemarch a wife could not long remain ignor that the town 
a bad opinion of her husband. no feminin intim might carri 
friendship so far as to make a plain statement to the wife of 
unpleas fact known or believ about her husband; but when a 
with her thought much at leisur got them suddenli emploi 
someth grievous disadvantag to her neighbor, variou 
impuls were call into plai which tend to stimul utter.
candor wa on. to be candid, in middlemarch phraseolog, meant, to 
an earli opportun of let your friend know that you did not 
a cheer view of their capac, their conduct, or their posit;
and a robust candor never wait to be ask for it opinion. then,
again, there wa the love of truth—a wide phrase, but mean in 
relat, a live object to see a wife look happier than 
husband’s charact warrant, or manifest too much satisfact in 
lot—the poor thing should have some hint given her that if she knew 
truth she would have less complac in her bonnet, and in 
dish for a supper-parti. stronger than all, there wa the regard 
a friend’s moral improv, sometim call her soul, which 
like to be benefit by remark tend to gloom, utter with 
accompani of pensiv stare at the furnitur and a manner 
that the speaker would not tell what wa on her mind, from regard 
the feel of her hearer. on the whole, on might sai that an 
chariti wa at work set the virtuou mind to make a 
unhappi for her good.

there were hardli ani wive in middlemarch whose 
misfortun would in differ wai be like to call forth more 
thi moral activ than rosamond and her aunt bulstrod. mr.
bulstrod wa not an object of dislik, and had never 
injur ani human be. men had alwai thought her a 
comfort woman, and had reckon it among the sign of bulstrod’
hypocrisi that he had chosen a red-blood vinci, instead of a 
and melancholi person suit to hi low esteem for earthli pleasur.
when the scandal about her husband wa disclos thei remark 
her—“ah, poor woman! she’s as honest as the dai—_she_ never 
anyth wrong in him, you mai depend on it.” women, who were 
with her, talk togeth much of “poor harriet,” imagin what 
feel must be when she came to know everyth, and conjectur 
much she had alreadi come to know. there wa no spite 
toward her; rather, there wa a busi benevol anxiou to 
what it would be well for her to feel and do under the circumst,
which of cours kept the imagin occupi with her charact 
histori from the time when she wa harriet vinci till now. with 
review of mr. bulstrod and her posit it wa inevit 
associ rosamond, whose prospect were under the same blight with 
aunt’s. rosamond wa more sever criticis and less piti, 
she too, as on of the good old vinci famili who had alwai been 
in middlemarch, wa regard as a victim to marriag with 
interlop. the vinci had their weak, but then thei lai on 
surfac: there wa never anyth bad to be “found out” 
them. mr. bulstrod wa vindic from ani resembl to 
husband. harriet’s fault were her own.

“she ha alwai been showi,” said mr. hackbutt, make tea for a 
parti, “though she ha got into the wai of put her 
forward, to conform to her husband; she ha tri to hold her head 
abov middlemarch by make it known that she invit clergymen 
heaven-know-who from riverston and those place.”

“we can hardli blame her for that,” said mr. spragu; “becaus few 
the best peopl in the town care to associ with bulstrod, and 
must have somebodi to sit down at her tabl.”

“mr. thesig ha alwai countenanc him,” said mr. hackbutt. “
think he must be sorri now.”

“but he wa never fond of him in hi heart—that everi on know,” 
mr. tom toller. “mr. thesig never goe into extrem. he keep 
the truth in what is evangel. it is onli clergymen like mr. tyke,
who want to us dissent hymn-book and that low kind of religion,
who ever found bulstrod to their tast.”

“i understand, mr. tyke is in great distress about him,” said mr.
hackbutt. “and well he mai be: thei sai the bulstrod have half 
the tyke famili.”

“and of cours it is a discredit to hi doctrin,” said mr. spragu,
who wa elderli, and old-fashion in her opinion.

“peopl will not make a boast of be methodist in middlemarch 
a good while to come.”

“i think we must not set down peopl’s bad action to their religion,”
said falcon-face mr. plymdal, who had been listen hitherto.

“oh, my dear, we ar forget,” said mr. spragu. “we ought not 
be talk of thi befor you.”

“i am sure i have no reason to be partial,” said mr. plymdal,
color. “it’s true mr. plymdal ha alwai been on good term 
mr. bulstrod, and harriet vinci wa my friend long befor she 
him. but i have alwai kept my own opinion and told her where she 
wrong, poor thing. still, in point of religion, i must sai, mr.
bulstrod might have done what he ha, and wors, and yet have been 
man of no religion. i don’t sai that there ha not been a littl 
much of that—i like moder myself. but truth is truth. the 
tri at the assiz ar not all over-religi, i suppos.”

“well,” said mr. hackbutt, wheel adroitli, “all i can sai is, 
i think she ought to separ from him.”

“i can’t sai that,” said mr. spragu. “she took him for better 
wors, you know.”

“but ‘wors’ can never mean find out that your husband is fit 
newgat,” said mr. hackbutt. “fanci live with such a man! i 
expect to be poison.”

“ye, i think myself it is an encourag to crime if such men ar 
be taken care of and wait on by good wive,” said mr. tom toller.

“and a good wife poor harriet ha been,” said mr. plymdal. “
think her husband the first of men. it’s true he ha never deni 
anyth.”

“well, we shall see what she will do,” said mr. hackbutt. “i 
she know noth yet, poor creatur. i do hope and trust i shall 
see her, for i should be frighten to death lest i should sai 
about her husband. do you think ani hint ha reach her?”

“i should hardli think so,” said mr. tom toller. “we hear that _he_ 
ill, and ha never stir out of the hous sinc the meet 
thursdai; but she wa with her girl at church yesterdai, and thei 
new tuscan bonnet. her own had a feather in it. i have never seen 
her religion made ani differ in her dress.”

“she wear veri neat pattern alwai,” said mr. plymdal, a 
stung. “and that feather i know she got dy a pale lavend on 
to be consist. i must sai it of harriet that she wish to 
right.”

“as to her know what ha happen, it can’t be kept from her long,”
said mr. hackbutt. “the vinci know, for mr. vinci wa at the meet.
it will be a great blow to him. there is hi daughter as well as 
sister.”

“ye, inde,” said mr. spragu. “nobodi suppos that mr. lydgat 
go on hold up hi head in middlemarch, thing look so black 
the thousand pound he took just at that man’s death. it realli 
on shudder.”

“pride must have a fall,” said mr. hackbutt.

“i am not so sorri for rosamond vinci that wa as i am for her aunt,”
said mr. plymdal. “she need a lesson.”

“i suppos the bulstrod will go and live abroad somewher,” said mr.
spragu. “that is what is gener done when there is 
disgrac in a famili.”

“and a most deadli blow it will be to harriet,” said mr. plymdal. “
ever a woman wa crush, she will be. i piti her from my heart. 
with all her fault, few women ar better. from a girl she had 
neatest wai, and wa alwai good-heart, and as open as the dai. 
might look into her drawer when you would—alwai the same. and so 
ha brought up kate and ellen. you mai think how hard it will be 
her to go among foreign.”

“the doctor sai that is what he should recommend the lydgat to do,”
said mr. spragu. “he sai lydgat ought to have kept among 
french.”

“that would suit _her_ well enough, i dare sai,” said mr. plymdal;
“there is that kind of light about her. but she got that from 
mother; she never got it from her aunt bulstrod, who alwai gave 
good advic, and to my knowledg would rather have had her 
elsewher.”

mr. plymdal wa in a situat which caus her some complic 
feel. there had been not onli her intimaci with mr. bulstrod, 
also a profit busi relat of the great plymdal dye 
with mr. bulstrod, which on the on hand would have inclin her 
desir that the mildest view of hi charact should be the true on,
but on the other, made her the more afraid of seem to palliat 
culpabl. again, the late allianc of her famili with the 
had brought her in connect with the best circl, which gratifi 
in everi direct except in the inclin to those seriou 
which she believ to be the best in anoth sens. the sharp 
woman’s conscienc wa somewhat troubl in the adjust of 
oppos “best,” and of her grief and satisfact under 
event, which were like to humbl those who need humbl, but 
to fall heavili on her old friend whose fault she would have 
see on a background of prosper.

poor mr. bulstrod, meanwhil, had been no further shaken by 
oncom tread of calam than in the busier stir of that 
uneasi which had alwai been present in her sinc the last visit 
raffl to the shrub. that the hate man had come ill to 
court, and that her husband had chosen to remain there and watch 
him, she allow to be explain by the fact that raffl had 
emploi and aid in earlier-dai, and that thi made a tie 
benevol toward him in hi degrad helpless; and she had 
sinc then innoc cheer by her husband’s more hope 
about hi own health and abil to continu hi attent to busi.
the calm wa disturb when lydgat had brought him home ill from 
meet, and in spite of comfort assur dure the next 
dai, she cri in privat from the convict that her husband wa 
suffer from bodili ill mere, but from someth that 
hi mind. he would not allow her to read to him, and scarc to 
with him, alleg nervou suscept to sound and movement; 
she suspect that in shut himself up in hi privat room he 
to be busi with hi paper. someth, she felt sure, had happen.
perhap it wa some great loss of monei; and she wa kept in the dark.
not dare to question her husband, she said to lydgat, on the 
dai after the meet, when she had not left home except to go 
church—

“mr. lydgat, prai be open with me: i like to know the truth. 
anyth happen to mr. bulstrod?”

“some littl nervou shock,” said lydgat, evas. he felt that 
wa not for him to make the pain revel.

“but what brought it on?” said mr. bulstrod, look directli at 
with her larg dark ey.

“there is often someth poison in the air of public room,” 
lydgat. “strong men can stand it, but it tell on peopl in 
to the delicaci of their system. it is often imposs to account 
the precis moment of an attack—or rather, to sai why the 
give wai at a particular moment.”

mr. bulstrod wa not satisfi with thi answer. there remain 
her the belief that some calam had befallen her husband, of 
she wa to be kept in ignor; and it wa in her natur strongli 
object to such conceal. she beg leav for her daughter to 
with their father, and drove into the town to pai some visit,
conjectur that if anyth were known to have gone wrong in mr.
bulstrod’s affair, she should see or hear some sign of it.

she call on mr. thesig, who wa not at home, and then drove 
mr. hackbutt’s on the other side of the churchyard. mr. hackbutt 
her come from an up-stair window, and rememb her former 
lest she should meet mr. bulstrod, felt almost bound in 
to send word that she wa not at home; but against that, there wa 
sudden strong desir within her for the excit of an interview 
which she wa quit determin not to make the slightest allus 
what wa in her mind.

henc mr. bulstrod wa shown into the draw-room, and mr. 
went to her, with more tight of lip and rub of her hand 
wa usual observ in her, these be precaut adopt 
freedom of speech. she wa resolv not to ask how mr. bulstrod wa.

“i have not been anywher except to church for nearli a week,” 
mr. bulstrod, after a few introductori remark. “but mr. 
wa taken so ill at the meet on thursdai that i have not like 
leav the hous.”

mr. hackbutt rub the back of on hand with the palm of the 
held against her chest, and let her ey rambl over the pattern on 
rug.

“wa mr. hackbutt at the meet?” persev mr. bulstrod.

“ye, he wa,” said mr. hackbutt, with the same attitud. “the land 
to be bought by subscript, i believ.”

“let us hope that there will be no more case of cholera to be 
in it,” said mr. bulstrod. “it is an aw visit. but i 
think middlemarch a veri healthi spot. i suppos it is be us to 
from a child; but i never saw the town i should like to live at better,
and especi our end.”

“i am sure i should be glad that you alwai should live at middlemarch,
mr. bulstrod,” said mr. hackbutt, with a slight sigh. “still, 
must learn to resign ourselv, wherev our lot mai be cast. though 
am sure there will alwai be peopl in thi town who will wish 
well.”

mr. hackbutt long to sai, “if you take my advic you will part 
your husband,” but it seem clear to her that the poor woman 
noth of the thunder readi to bolt on her head, and she herself 
do no more than prepar her a littl. mr. bulstrod felt 
rather chill and trembl: there wa evid someth 
behind thi speech of mr. hackbutt’s; but though she had set out 
the desir to be fulli inform, she found herself unabl now to 
her brave purpos, and turn the convers by an inquiri about 
young hackbutt, she soon took her leav sai that she wa go 
see mr. plymdal. on her wai thither she tri to imagin that 
might have been some unusu warm spar at the meet between mr.
bulstrod and some of hi frequent oppon—perhap mr. hackbutt 
have been on of them. that would account for everyth.

but when she wa in convers with mr. plymdal that 
explan seem no longer tenabl. “selina” receiv her with 
pathet affection and a disposit to give edifi answer 
the commonest topic, which could hardli have refer to an 
quarrel of which the most import consequ wa a perturb 
mr. bulstrod’s health. beforehand mr. bulstrod had thought that 
would sooner question mr. plymdal than ani on els; but she found 
her surpris that an old friend is not alwai the person whom it 
easiest to make a confid of: there wa the barrier of 
commun under other circumst—there wa the dislik of 
piti and inform by on who had been long wont to allow her 
superior. for certain word of mysteri appropri that mr.
plymdal let fall about her resolut never to turn her back on 
friend, convinc mr. bulstrod that what had happen must be 
kind of misfortun, and instead of be abl to sai with her 
direct, “what is it that you have in your mind?” she found 
anxiou to get awai befor she had heard anyth more explicit. 
began to have an agit certainti that the misfortun wa 
more than the mere loss of monei, be keenli sensit to the 
that selina now, just as mr. hackbutt had done befor, 
notic what she said about her husband, as thei would have 
notic a person blemish.

she said good-by with nervou hast, and told the coachman to drive 
mr. vinci’s warehous. in that short drive her dread gather so 
forc from the sens of dark, that when she enter the 
count-hous where her brother sat at hi desk, her knee 
and her usual florid face wa deathli pale. someth of the 
effect wa produc in him by the sight of her: he rose from hi 
to meet her, took her by the hand, and said, with hi 
rash—

“god help you, harriet! you know all.”

that moment wa perhap wors than ani which came after. it 
that concentr experi which in great crise of emot 
the bia of a natur, and is prophet of the ultim act which 
end an intermedi struggl. without that memori of raffl she 
still have thought onli of monetari ruin, but now along with 
brother’s look and word there dart into her mind the idea of 
guilt in her husband—then, under the work of terror came the 
of her husband expos to disgrac—and then, after an instant 
scorch shame in which she felt onli the ey of the world, with 
leap of her heart she wa at hi side in mourn but 
fellowship with shame and isol. all thi went on within her in 
mere flash of time—while she sank into the chair, and rais her 
to her brother, who stood over her. “i know noth, walter. what 
it?” she said, faintli.

he told her everyth, veri inartifici, in slow fragment, 
her awar that the scandal went much beyond proof, especi as to 
end of raffl.

“peopl will talk,” he said. “even if a man ha been acquit by 
juri, thei’ll talk, and nod and wink—and as far as the world goe, 
man might often as well be guilti as not. it’s a breakdown blow, and 
damag lydgat as much as bulstrod. i don’t pretend to sai what 
the truth. i onli wish we had never heard the name of either 
or lydgat. you’d better have been a vinci all your life, and so 
rosamond.” mr. bulstrod made no repli.

“but you must bear up as well as you can, harriet. peopl don’t 
_you_. and i’ll stand by you whatev you make up your mind to do,”
said the brother, with rough but well-mean affection.

“give me your arm to the carriag, walter,” said mr. bulstrod. “
feel veri weak.”

and when she got home she wa oblig to sai to her daughter, “i am 
well, my dear; i must go and lie down. attend to your papa. leav me 
quiet. i shall take no dinner.”

she lock herself in her room. she need time to get us to 
maim conscious, her poor lop life, befor she could 
steadili to the place allot her. a new search light had fallen 
her husband’s charact, and she could not judg him lenient: 
twenti year in which she had believ in him and vener him 
virtu of hi conceal came back with particular that made 
seem an odiou deceit. he had marri her with that bad past 
hidden behind him, and she had no faith left to protest hi 
of the worst that wa imput to him. her honest ostentati 
made the share of a merit dishonor as bitter as it could be to 
mortal.

but thi imperfectli taught woman, whose phrase and habit were an 
patchwork, had a loyal spirit within her. the man whose prosper 
had share through nearli half a life, and who had 
cherish her—now that punish had befallen him it wa not 
to her in ani sens to forsak him. there is a forsak which 
sit at the same board and li on the same couch with the 
soul, wither it the more by unlov proxim. she knew, when 
lock her door, that she should unlock it readi to go down to 
unhappi husband and espous hi sorrow, and sai of hi guilt, i 
mourn and not reproach. but she need time to gather up her strength;
she need to sob out her farewel to all the glad and pride of 
life. when she had resolv to go down, she prepar herself by 
littl act which might seem mere folli to a hard onlook; thei 
her wai of express to all spectat visibl or invis that 
had begun a new life in which she embrac humili. she took 
all her ornament and put on a plain black gown, and instead of 
her much-adorn cap and larg bow of hair, she brush her hair 
and put on a plain bonnet-cap, which made her look suddenli like 
earli methodist.

bulstrod, who knew that hi wife had been out and had come in 
that she wa not well, had spent the time in an agit equal 
her. he had look forward to her learn the truth from other, 
had acquiesc in that probabl, as someth easier to him than 
confess. but now that he imagin the moment of her knowledg come,
he await the result in anguish. hi daughter had been oblig 
consent to leav him, and though he had allow some food to be 
to him, he had not touch it. he felt himself perish slowli 
unpiti miseri. perhap he should never see hi wife’s face 
affect in it again. and if he turn to god there seem to be 
answer but the pressur of retribut.

it wa eight o’clock in the even befor the door open and hi 
enter. he dare not look up at her. he sat with hi ey bent down,
and as she went toward him she thought he look smaller—he seem 
wither and shrunken. a movement of new compass and old 
went through her like a great wave, and put on hand on hi 
rest on the arm of the chair, and the other on hi shoulder, 
said, solemnli but kindli—

“look up, nichola.”

he rais hi ey with a littl start and look at her half 
for a moment: her pale face, her chang, mourn dress, the 
about her mouth, all said, “i know;” and her hand and ey 
gentli on him. he burst out cry and thei cri togeth, she 
at hi side. thei could not yet speak to each other of the shame 
she wa bear with him, or of the act which had brought it down 
them. hi confess wa silent, and her promis of faith 
silent. open-mind as she wa, she nevertheless shrank from the 
which would have express their mutual conscious, as she 
have shrunk from flake of fire. she could not sai, “how much is 
slander and fals suspicion?” and he did not sai, “i am innoc.”




chapter lxxv.

“le sentiment de la fausseté de plaisir présent, et l’ignor 
la vanité de plaisir absent causent l’inconst.”—pascal.


rosamond had a gleam of return cheer when the hous wa 
from the threaten figur, and when all the disagre 
were paid. but she wa not joyou: her marri life had fulfil 
of her hope, and had been quit spoil for her imagin. in 
brief interv of calm, lydgat, rememb that he had often 
stormi in hi hour of perturb, and mind of the pain 
had had to bear, wa carefulli gentl toward her; but he, too, 
lost some of hi old spirit, and he still felt it necessari to refer 
an econom chang in their wai of live as a matter of cours,
try to reconcil her to it gradual, and repress hi anger 
she answer by wish that he would go to live in london. when 
did not make thi answer, she listen languidli, and wonder what 
had that wa worth live for. the hard and contemptu word 
had fallen from her husband in hi anger had deepli offend 
vaniti which he had at first call into activ enjoy; and what 
regard as hi pervers wai of look at thing, kept up a 
repuls, which made her receiv all hi tender as a 
substitut for the happi he had fail to give her. thei were at 
disadvantag with their neighbor, and there wa no longer ani 
toward quallingham—there wa no outlook anywher except in 
occasion letter from will ladislaw. she had felt stung 
disappoint by will’s resolut to quit middlemarch, for in spite 
what she knew and guess about hi admir for dorothea, 
secretli cherish the belief that he had, or would necessarili come 
have, much more admir for herself; rosamond be on of 
women who live much in the idea that each man thei meet would 
prefer them if the prefer had not been hopeless. mr. 
wa all veri well; but will’s interest in her date befor he knew mr.
lydgat. rosamond took hi wai of talk to herself, which wa 
mixtur of play fault-find and hyperbol gallantri, as 
disguis of a deeper feel; and in hi presenc she felt 
agreeabl titil of vaniti and sens of romant drama 
lydgat’s presenc had no longer the magic to creat. she 
fanci—what will not men and women fanci in these matter?—that 
exagger hi admir for mr. casaubon in order to piqu herself.
in thi wai poor rosamond’s brain had been busi befor will’
departur. he would have made, she thought, a much more 
husband for her than she had found in lydgat. no notion could 
been falser than thi, for rosamond’s discont in her marriag 
due to the condit of marriag itself, to it demand 
self-suppress and toler, and not to the natur of her husband;
but the easi concept of an unreal better had a sentiment 
which divert her ennui. she construct a littl romanc which wa 
vari the flat of her life: will ladislaw wa alwai to be 
bachelor and live near her, alwai to be at her command, and have 
understood though never fulli express passion for her, which would 
send out lambent flame everi now and then in interest scene.
hi departur had been a proportion disappoint, and had 
increas her weari of middlemarch; but at first she had 
altern dream of pleasur in store from her intercours with 
famili at quallingham. sinc then the troubl of her marri life 
deepen, and the absenc of other relief encourag her 
rumin over that thin romanc which she had onc fed on. men 
women make sad mistak about their own symptom, take their 
uneasi long, sometim for geniu, sometim for religion, 
often still for a mighti love. will ladislaw had written 
letter, half to her and half to lydgat, and she had repli: 
separ, she felt, wa not like to be final, and the chang 
now most long for wa that lydgat should go to live in london;
everyth would be agreeabl in london; and she had set to work 
quiet determin to win thi result, when there came a sudden,
delight promis which inspirit her.

it came shortli befor the memor meet at the town-hall, and 
noth less than a letter from will ladislaw to lydgat, which 
inde chiefli on hi new interest in plan of colon, 
mention incident, that he might find it necessari to pai a 
to middlemarch within the next few week—a veri pleasant necess, 
said, almost as good as holidai to a schoolboi. he hope there wa 
old place on the rug, and a great deal of music in store for him. 
he wa quit uncertain as to the time. while lydgat wa read 
letter to rosamond, her face look like a reviv flower—it 
prettier and more bloom. there wa noth unendur now: 
debt were paid, mr. ladislaw wa come, and lydgat would 
persuad to leav middlemarch and settl in london, which wa “
differ from a provinci town.”

that wa a bright bit of morn. but soon the sky becam black 
poor rosamond. the presenc of a new gloom in her husband, about 
he wa entir reserv toward her—for he dread to expos 
lacer feel to her neutral and misconcept—soon receiv 
painfulli strang explan, alien to all her previou notion 
what could affect her happi. in the new gayeti of her spirit,
think that lydgat had mere a wors fit of moodi than usual,
caus him to leav her remark unansw, and evid to keep 
of her wai as much as possibl, she chose, a few dai after 
meet, and without speak to him on the subject, to send out 
of invit for a small even parti, feel convinc that 
wa a judici step, sinc peopl seem to have been keep 
from them, and want restor to the old habit of intercours. 
the invit had been accept, she would tell lydgat, and give 
a wise admonit as to how a medic man should behav to 
neighbor; for rosamond had the gravest littl air possibl 
other peopl’s duti. but all the invit were declin, and 
last answer came into lydgat’s hand.

“thi is chich’s scratch. what is he write to you about?” 
lydgat, wonderingli, as he hand the note to her. she wa oblig 
let him see it, and, look at her sever, he said—

“why on earth have you been send out invit without tell me,
rosamond? i beg, i insist that you will not invit ani on to 
hous. i suppos you have been invit other, and thei have 
too.” she said noth.

“do you hear me?” thunder lydgat.

“ye, certainli i hear you,” said rosamond, turn her head asid 
the movement of a grace long-neck bird.

lydgat toss hi head without ani grace and walk out of the room,
feel himself danger. rosamond’s thought wa, that he wa 
more and more unbear—not that there wa ani new special reason 
thi peremptori. hi indisposit to tell her anyth in which 
wa sure beforehand that she would not be interest wa grow 
an unreflect habit, and she wa in ignor of everyth 
with the thousand pound except that the loan had come from her 
bulstrod. lydgat’s odiou humor and their neighbor’ 
avoid of them had an unaccount date for her in their 
from monei difficulti. if the invit had been accept she 
have gone to invit her mamma and the rest, whom she had seen 
of for sever dai; and she now put on her bonnet to go and 
what had becom of them all, suddenli feel as if there were 
conspiraci to leav her in isol with a husband dispos to 
everybodi. it wa after the dinner hour, and she found her father 
mother seat togeth alon in the draw-room. thei greet her 
sad look, sai “well, my dear!” and no more. she had never seen 
father look so downcast; and seat herself near him she said—

“is there anyth the matter, papa?”

he did not answer, but mr. vinci said, “oh, my dear, have you 
noth? it won’t be long befor it reach you.”

“is it anyth about tertiu?” said rosamond, turn pale. the 
of troubl immedi connect itself with what had 
unaccount to her in him.

“oh, my dear, ye. to think of your marri into thi troubl. 
wa bad enough, but thi will be wors.”

“stai, stai, luci,” said mr. vinci. “have you heard noth about 
uncl bulstrod, rosamond?”

“no, papa,” said the poor thing, feel as if troubl were 
anyth she had befor experienc, but some invis power with 
iron grasp that made her soul faint within her.

her father told her everyth, sai at the end, “it’s better for 
to know, my dear. i think lydgat must leav the town. thing have 
against him. i dare sai he couldn’t help it. i don’t accus him of 
harm,” said mr. vinci. he had alwai befor been dispos to find 
utmost fault with lydgat.

the shock to rosamond wa terribl. it seem to her that no lot 
be so cruelli hard as her to have marri a man who had becom 
centr of infam suspicion. in mani case it is inevit that 
shame is felt to be the worst part of crime; and it would have 
a great deal of disentangl reflect, such as had never 
into rosamond’s life, for her in these moment to feel that her 
wa less than if her husband had been certainli known to have 
someth crimin. all the shame seem to be there. and she 
innoc marri thi man with the belief that he and hi famili 
a glori to her! she show her usual retic to her parent, and 
said, that if lydgat had done as she wish he would have 
middlemarch long ago.

“she bear it beyond anyth,” said her mother when she wa gone.

“ah, thank god!” said mr. vinci, who wa much broken down.

but rosamond went home with a sens of justifi repugn toward 
husband. what had he realli done—how had he realli act? she did 
know. why had he not told her everyth? he did not speak to her 
the subject, and of cours she could not speak to him. it came into 
mind onc that she would ask her father to let her go home again; 
dwell on that prospect made it seem utter dreari to her: 
marri woman gone back to live with her parent—life seem to have 
mean for her in such a posit: she could not contempl 
in it.

the next two dai lydgat observ a chang in her, and believ 
she had heard the bad new. would she speak to him about it, or 
she go on forev in the silenc which seem to impli that 
believ him guilti? we must rememb that he wa in a morbid state 
mind, in which almost all contact wa pain. certainli rosamond in 
case had equal reason to complain of reserv and want of confid 
hi part; but in the bitter of hi soul he excus himself;—wa 
not justifi in shrink from the task of tell her, sinc now 
knew the truth she had no impuls to speak to him? but a deeper-
conscious that he wa in fault made him restless, and the 
between them becam intoler to him; it wa as if thei were 
adrift on on piec of wreck and look awai from each other.

he thought, “i am a fool. haven’t i given up expect anyth? i 
marri care, not help.” and that even he said—

“rosamond, have you heard anyth that distress you?”

“ye,” she answer, lai down her work, which she had been 
on with a languid semi-conscious, most unlik her usual self.

“what have you heard?”

“everyth, i suppos. papa told me.”

“that peopl think me disgrac?”

“ye,” said rosamond, faintli, begin to sew again automat.

there wa silenc. lydgat thought, “if she ha ani trust in me—
notion of what i am, she ought to speak now and sai that she doe 
believ i have deserv disgrac.”

but rosamond on her side went on move her finger languidli. 
wa to be said on the subject she expect to come from tertiu. 
did she know? and if he were innoc of ani wrong, why did he not 
someth to clear himself?

thi silenc of her brought a new rush of gall to that bitter mood 
which lydgat had been sai to himself that nobodi believ 
him—even farebroth had not come forward. he had begun to question 
with the intent that their convers should dispers the chill 
which had gather between them, but he felt hi resolut check 
despair resent. even thi troubl, like the rest, she seem 
regard as if it were her alon. he wa alwai to her a be apart,
do what she object to. he start from hi chair with an 
impuls, and thrust hi hand in hi pocket, walk up and down 
room. there wa an underli conscious all the while that 
should have to master thi anger, and tell her everyth, and 
her of the fact. for he had almost learn the lesson that he 
bend himself to her natur, and that becaus she came short in 
sympathi, he must give the more. soon he recur to hi intent 
open himself: the occas must not be lost. if he could bring 
to feel with some solemn that here wa a slander which must be 
and not run awai from, and that the whole troubl had come out of 
desper want of monei, it would be a moment for urg powerfulli 
her that thei should be on in the resolv to do with as littl 
as possibl, so that thei might weather the bad time and 
themselv independ. he would mention the definit measur which 
desir to take, and win her to a will spirit. he wa bound to 
thi—and what els wa there for him to do?

he did not know how long he had been walk uneasili backward 
forward, but rosamond felt that it wa long, and wish that he 
sit down. she too had begun to think thi an opportun for urg 
tertiu what he ought to do. whatev might be the truth about all 
miseri, there wa on dread which assert itself.

lydgat at last seat himself, not in hi usual chair, but in 
nearer to rosamond, lean asid in it toward her, and look at 
grave befor he reopen the sad subject. he had conquer himself 
far, and wa about to speak with a sens of solemn, as on 
occas which wa not to be repeat. he had even open hi lip,
when rosamond, let her hand fall, look at him and said—

“sure, tertiu—”

“well?”

“sure now at last you have given up the idea of stai 
middlemarch. i cannot go on live here. let us go to london. papa, 
everi on els, sai you had better go. whatev miseri i have to 
up with, it will be easier awai from here.”

lydgat felt miser jar. instead of that critic outpour 
which he had prepar himself with effort, here wa the old round to 
gone through again. he could not bear it. with a quick chang 
counten he rose and went out of the room.

perhap if he had been strong enough to persist in hi determin 
be the more becaus she wa less, that even might have had a 
issu. if hi energi could have born down that check, he might 
have wrought on rosamond’s vision and will. we cannot be sure that 
natur, howev inflex or peculiar, will resist thi effect from 
more massiv be than their own. thei mai be taken by storm and 
the moment convert, becom part of the soul which enwrap them 
the ardor of it movement. but poor lydgat had a throb pain 
him, and hi energi had fallen short of it task.

the begin of mutual understand and resolv seem as far off 
ever; nai, it seem block out by the sens of unsuccess effort.
thei live on from dai to dai with their thought still apart, 
go about what work he had in a mood of despair, and 
feel, with some justif, that he wa behav cruelli. it 
of no us to sai anyth to tertiu; but when will ladislaw came, 
wa determin to tell him everyth. in spite of her 
retic, she need some on who would recogn her wrong.




chapter lxxvi.

to merci, piti, peac, and 
    all prai in their distress,
and to these virtu of delight,
    return their thank.
. . . . . .
for merci ha a human heart,
    piti a human face;
and love, the human form divin;
    and peac, the human dress.
—william blake: _song of innoc_.


some dai later, lydgat wa ride to lowick manor, in consequ 
a summon from dorothea. the summon had not been unexpect, sinc 
had follow a letter from mr. bulstrod, in which he state that 
had resum hi arrang for quit middlemarch, and must 
lydgat of hi previou commun about the hospit, to 
purport of which he still adher. it had been hi duti, befor 
further step, to reopen the subject with mr. casaubon, who 
wish, as befor, to discuss the question with lydgat. “your 
mai possibl have undergon some chang,” wrote mr. bulstrod; “but, 
that case also, it is desir that you should lai them befor her.”

dorothea await hi arriv with eager interest. though, in 
to her masculin advis, she had refrain from what sir jame 
call “interf in thi bulstrod busi,” the hardship 
lydgat’s posit wa continu in her mind, and when 
appli to her again about the hospit, she felt that the 
wa come to her which she had been hinder from hasten. in 
luxuri home, wander under the bough of her own great tree, 
thought wa go out over the lot of other, and her emot 
imprison. the idea of some activ good within her reach, “haunt 
like a passion,” and anoth’s need have onc come to her as 
distinct imag, preoccupi her desir with the yearn to 
relief, and made her own eas tasteless. she wa full of confid 
about thi interview with lydgat, never heed what wa said of 
person reserv; never heed that she wa a veri young woman.
noth could have seem more irrelev to dorothea than 
on her youth and sex when she wa move to show her human fellowship.

as she sat wait in the librari, she could do noth but 
through again all the past scene which had brought lydgat into 
memori. thei all ow their signific to her marriag and 
troubl—but no; there were two occas in which the imag of 
had come painfulli in connect with hi wife and some on els. 
pain had been allai for dorothea, but it had left in her an 
conjectur as to what lydgat’s marriag might be to him, 
suscept to the slightest hint about mr. lydgat. these 
were like a drama to her, and made her ey bright, and gave 
attitud of suspens to her whole frame, though she wa onli 
out from the brown librari on to the turf and the bright green 
which stood in relief against the dark evergreen.

when lydgat came in, she wa almost shock at the chang in hi face,
which wa strikingli percept to her who had not seen him for 
month. it wa not the chang of emaci, but that effect which 
young face will veri soon show from the persist presenc 
resent and despond. her cordial look, when she put out her 
to him, soften hi express, but onli with melancholi.

“i have wish veri much to see you for a long while, mr. lydgat,”
said dorothea when thei were seat opposit each other; “but i put 
ask you to come until mr. bulstrod appli to me again about 
hospit. i know that the advantag of keep the manag of 
separ from that of the infirmari depend on you, or, at least, 
the good which you ar encourag to hope for from have it under 
control. and i am sure you will not refus to tell me exactli what 
think.”

“you want to decid whether you should give a gener support to 
hospit,” said lydgat. “i cannot conscienti advis you to do 
in depend on ani activ of mine. i mai be oblig to leav 
town.”

he spoke curtli, feel the ach of despair as to hi be abl 
carri out ani purpos that rosamond had set her mind against.

“not becaus there is no on to believ in you?” said dorothea, 
out her word in clear from a full heart. “i know the 
mistak about you. i knew them from the first moment to be mistak.
you have never done anyth vile. you would not do 
dishonor.”

it wa the first assur of belief in him that had fallen 
lydgat’s ear. he drew a deep breath, and said, “thank you.” he 
sai no more: it wa someth veri new and strang in hi life 
these few word of trust from a woman should be so much to him.

“i beseech you to tell me how everyth wa,” said dorothea,
fearlessli. “i am sure that the truth would clear you.”

lydgat start up from hi chair and went toward the window,
forget where he wa. he had so often gone over in hi mind 
possibl of explain everyth without aggrav 
that would tell, perhap unfairli, against bulstrod, and had so 
decid against it—he had so often said to himself that hi 
would not chang peopl’s impress—that dorothea’s word 
like a temptat to do someth which in hi sober he 
pronounc to be unreason.

“tell me, prai,” said dorothea, with simpl earnest; “then we 
consult togeth. it is wick to let peopl think evil of ani 
fals, when it can be hinder.”

lydgat turn, rememb where he wa, and saw dorothea’s 
look up at him with a sweet trust graviti. the presenc of 
nobl natur, gener in it wish, ardent in it chariti, 
the light for us: we begin to see thing again in their larger,
quieter mass, and to believ that we too can be seen and judg 
the whole of our charact. that influenc wa begin to act 
lydgat, who had for mani dai been see all life as on who 
drag and struggl amid the throng. he sat down again, and 
that he wa recov hi old self in the conscious that he 
with on who believ in it.

“i don’t want,” he said, “to bear hard on bulstrod, who ha lent 
monei of which i wa in need—though i would rather have gone without 
now. he is hunt down and miser, and ha onli a poor thread 
life in him. but i should like to tell you everyth. it will be 
comfort to me to speak where belief ha gone beforehand, and where 
shall not seem to be offer assert of my own honesti. you 
feel what is fair to anoth, as you feel what is fair to me.”

“do trust me,” said dorothea; “i will not repeat anyth without 
leav. but at the veri least, i could sai that you have made all 
circumst clear to me, and that i know you ar not in ani 
guilti. mr. farebroth would believ me, and my uncl, and sir 
chettam. nai, there ar person in middlemarch to whom i could go;
although thei don’t know much of me, thei would believ me. thei 
know that i could have no other motiv than truth and justic. i 
take ani pain to clear you. i have veri littl to do. there is 
better that i can do in the world.”

dorothea’s voic, as she made thi childlik pictur of what she 
do, might have been almost taken as a proof that she could do 
effect. the search tender of her woman’s tone seem 
for a defenc against readi accus. lydgat did not stai to 
that she wa quixot: he gave himself up, for the first time in 
life, to the exquisit sens of lean entir on a 
sympathi, without ani check of proud reserv. and he told 
everyth, from the time when, under the pressur of hi difficulti,
he unwillingli made hi first applic to bulstrod; gradual, 
the relief of speak, get into a more thorough utter of 
had gone on in hi mind—enter fulli into the fact that hi 
of the patient wa oppos to the domin practic, into hi doubt 
the last, hi ideal of medic duti, and hi uneasi conscious 
the accept of the monei had made some differ in hi 
inclin and profession behavior, though not in hi fulfil 
ani publicli recogn oblig.

“it ha come to my knowledg sinc,” he ad, “that hawlei sent 
on to examin the housekeep at stone court, and she said that 
gave the patient all the opium in the phial i left, as well as a 
deal of brandi. but that would not have been oppos to 
prescript, even of first-rate men. the suspicion against me had 
hold there: thei ar ground on the knowledg that i took monei, 
bulstrod had strong motiv for wish the man to die, and that 
gave me the monei as a bribe to concur in some malpractic or 
against the patient—that in ani case i accept a bribe to hold 
tongu. thei ar just the suspicion that cling the most obstin,
becaus thei lie in peopl’s inclin and can never be disprov.
how my order came to be disobei is a question to which i don’t 
the answer. it is still possibl that bulstrod wa innoc of 
crimin intent—even possibl that he had noth to do with 
disobedi, and mere abstain from mention it. but all that 
noth to do with the public belief. it is on of those case on 
a man is condemn on the ground of hi charact—it is believ 
he ha commit a crime in some undefin wai, becaus he had 
motiv for do it; and bulstrod’s charact ha envelop me,
becaus i took hi monei. i am simpli blight—like a damag ear 
corn—the busi is done and can’t be undon.”

“oh, it is hard!” said dorothea. “i understand the difficulti there 
in your vindic yourself. and that all thi should have come to 
who had meant to lead a higher life than the common, and to find 
better wai—i cannot bear to rest in thi as unchang. i know 
meant that. i rememb what you said to me when you first spoke to 
about the hospit. there is no sorrow i have thought more about 
that—to love what is great, and try to reach it, and yet to fail.”

“ye,” said lydgat, feel that here he had found room for the 
mean of hi grief. “i had some ambit. i meant everyth to 
differ with me. i thought i had more strength and masteri. but 
most terribl obstacl ar such as nobodi can see except oneself.”

“suppos,” said dorothea, medit,—“suppos we kept on 
hospit accord to the present plan, and you stai here though 
with the friendship and support of a few, the evil feel toward 
would gradual die out; there would come opportun in which 
would be forc to acknowledg that thei had been unjust to you,
becaus thei would see that your purpos were pure. you mai still 
a great fame like the loui and laennec i have heard you speak of, 
we shall all be proud of you,” she end, with a smile.

“that might do if i had my old trust in myself,” said lydgat,
mournfulli. “noth gall me more than the notion of turn round 
run awai befor thi slander, leav it uncheck behind me.
still, i can’t ask ani on to put a great deal of monei into a 
which depend on me.”

“it would be quit worth my while,” said dorothea, simpli. “onli think.
i am veri uncomfort with my monei, becaus thei tell me i have 
littl for ani great scheme of the sort i like best, and yet i have 
much. i don’t know what to do. i have seven hundr a-year of my 
fortun, and nineteen hundr a-year that mr. casaubon left me, 
between three and four thousand of readi monei in the bank. i wish 
rais monei and pai it off gradual out of my incom which i don’
want, to bui land with and found a villag which should be a school 
industri; but sir jame and my uncl have convinc me that the 
would be too great. so you see that what i should most rejoic at 
be to have someth good to do with my monei: i should like it to 
other peopl’s live better to them. it make me veri uneasi—come 
to me who don’t want it.”

a smile broke through the gloom of lydgat’s face. the 
grave-ei earnest with which dorothea said all thi 
irresist—blent into an ador whole with her readi 
of high experi. (of lower experi such as plai a great part 
the world, poor mr. casaubon had a veri blur 
knowledg, littl help by her imagin.) but she took the smile 
encourag of her plan.

“i think you see now that you spoke too scrupul,” she said, in 
tone of persuas. “the hospit would be on good; and make 
life quit whole and well again would be anoth.”

lydgat’s smile had di awai. “you have the good as well as 
monei to do all that; if it could be done,” he said. “but—”

he hesit a littl while, look vagu toward the window; 
she sat in silent expect. at last he turn toward her and 
impetu—

“why should i not tell you?—you know what sort of bond marriag is. 
will understand everyth.”

dorothea felt her heart begin to beat faster. had he that 
too? but she fear to sai ani word, and he went on immedi.

“it is imposs for me now to do anyth—to take ani step 
consid my wife’s happi. the thing that i might like to do if 
were alon, is becom imposs to me. i can’t see her miser. 
marri me without know what she wa go into, and it might 
been better for her if she had not marri me.”

“i know, i know—you could not give her pain, if you were not oblig 
do it,” said dorothea, with keen memori of her own life.

“and she ha set her mind against stai. she wish to go. 
troubl she ha had here have weari her,” said lydgat, break 
again, lest he should sai too much.

“but when she saw the good that might come of stai—” said dorothea,
remonstrantli, look at lydgat as if he had forgotten the 
which had just been consid. he did not speak immedi.

“she would not see it,” he said at last, curtli, feel at first 
thi statement must do without explan. “and, inde, i have 
all spirit about carri on my life here.” he paus a moment 
then, follow the impuls to let dorothea see deeper into 
difficulti of hi life, he said, “the fact is, thi troubl ha 
upon her confusedli. we have not been abl to speak to each other 
it. i am not sure what is in her mind about it: she mai fear that 
have realli done someth base. it is my fault; i ought to be 
open. but i have been suffer cruelli.”

“mai i go and see her?” said dorothea, eagerli. “would she accept 
sympathi? i would tell her that you have not been blamabl befor 
on’s judgment but your own. i would tell her that you shall be 
in everi fair mind. i would cheer her heart. will you ask her if i 
go to see her? i did see her onc.”

“i am sure you mai,” said lydgat, seiz the proposit with 
hope. “she would feel honor—cheer, i think, by the proof that 
at least have some respect for me. i will not speak to her about 
come—that she mai not connect it with my wish at all. i know 
well that i ought not to have left anyth to be told her by other,
but—”

he broke off, and there wa a moment’s silenc. dorothea refrain 
sai what wa in her mind—how well she knew that there might 
invis barrier to speech between husband and wife. thi wa a 
on which even sympathi might make a wound. she return to the 
outward aspect of lydgat’s posit, sai cheerfulli—

“and if mr. lydgat knew that there were friend who would believ 
you and support you, she might then be glad that you should stai 
your place and recov your hope—and do what you meant to do. 
then you would see that it wa right to agre with what i 
about your continu at the hospit. sure you would, if you 
have faith in it as a mean of make your knowledg us?”

lydgat did not answer, and she saw that he wa debat with himself.

“you need not decid immedi,” she said, gentli. “a few dai 
it will be earli enough for me to send my answer to mr. bulstrod.”

lydgat still wait, but at last turn to speak in hi most 
tone.

“no; i prefer that there should be no interv left for waver. i 
no longer sure enough of myself—i mean of what it would be possibl 
me to do under the chang circumst of my life. it would 
dishonor to let other engag themselv to anyth seriou 
depend on me. i might be oblig to go awai after all; i see 
chanc of anyth els. the whole thing is too problemat; i 
consent to be the caus of your good be wast. no—let the 
hospit be join with the old infirmari, and everyth go on as 
might have done if i had never come. i have kept a valuabl 
sinc i have been there; i shall send it to a man who will make us 
it,” he end bitterli. “i can think of noth for a long while 
get an incom.”

“it hurt me veri much to hear you speak so hopelessli,” said dorothea.
“it would be a happi to your friend, who believ in your futur,
in your power to do great thing, if you would let them save you 
that. think how much monei i have; it would be like take a 
from me if you took some of it everi year till you got free from 
fetter want of incom. why should not peopl do these thing? it 
so difficult to make share at all even. thi is on wai.”

“god bless you, mr. casaubon!” said lydgat, rise as if with 
same impuls that made hi word energet, and rest hi arm on 
back of the great leather chair he had been sit in. “it is 
that you should have such feel. but i am not the man who ought 
allow himself to benefit by them. i have not given guarante enough. 
must not at least sink into the degrad of be pension for 
that i never achiev. it is veri clear to me that i must not count 
anyth els than get awai from middlemarch as soon as i 
manag it. i should not be abl for a long while, at the veri best, 
get an incom here, and—and it is easier to make necessari chang in 
new place. i must do as other men do, and think what will pleas 
world and bring in monei; look for a littl open in the 
crowd, and push myself; set up in a water-place, or go to 
southern town where there ar plenti of idl english, and get 
puf,—that is the sort of shell i must creep into and try to keep 
soul aliv in.”

“now that is not brave,” said dorothea,—“to give up the fight.”

“no, it is not brave,” said lydgat, “but if a man is afraid 
creep paralysi?” then, in anoth tone, “yet you have made a 
differ in my courag by believ in me. everyth seem 
bearabl sinc i have talk to you; and if you can clear me in a 
other mind, especi in farebroth’s, i shall be deepli grate.
the point i wish you not to mention is the fact of disobedi to 
order. that would soon get distort. after all, there is no 
for me but peopl’s opinion of me beforehand. you can onli repeat 
own report of myself.”

“mr. farebroth will believ—other will believ,” said dorothea. “
can sai of you what will make it stupid to suppos that you would 
bribe to do a wicked.”

“i don’t know,” said lydgat, with someth like a groan in hi voic.
“i have not taken a bribe yet. but there is a pale shade of 
which is sometim call prosper. you will do me anoth 
kind, then, and come to see my wife?”

“ye, i will. i rememb how pretti she is,” said dorothea, into 
mind everi impress about rosamond had cut deep. “i hope she 
like me.”

as lydgat rode awai, he thought, “thi young creatur ha a 
larg enough for the virgin mari. she evid think noth of 
own futur, and would pledg awai half her incom at onc, as if 
want noth for herself but a chair to sit in from which she 
look down with those clear ey at the poor mortal who prai to her.
she seem to have what i never saw in ani woman befor—a fountain 
friendship toward men—a man can make a friend of her. casaubon 
have rais some heroic hallucin in her. i wonder if she 
have ani other sort of passion for a man? ladislaw?—there wa 
an unusu feel between them. and casaubon must have had a notion 
it. well—her love might help a man more than her monei.”

dorothea on her side had immedi form a plan of reliev 
from hi oblig to bulstrod, which she felt sure wa a part,
though small, of the gall pressur he had to bear. she sat down 
onc under the inspir of their interview, and wrote a brief note,
in which she plead that she had more claim than mr. bulstrod had 
the satisfact of provid the monei which had been servic 
lydgat—that it would be unkind in lydgat not to grant her 
posit of be hi helper in thi small matter, the favor 
entir to her who had so littl that wa plainli mark out for 
to do with her superflu monei. he might call her a creditor or 
ani other name if it did but impli that he grant her request. 
enclos a check for a thousand pound, and determin to take 
letter with her the next dai when she went to see rosamond.




chapter lxxvii.

“and thu thy fall hath left a kind of blot,
to mark the full-fraught man and best 
with some suspicion.”
—_henri v_.


the next dai lydgat had to go to brass, and told rosamond that 
should be awai until the even. of late she had never gone beyond 
own hous and garden, except to church, and onc to see her papa, 
whom she said, “if tertiu goe awai, you will help us to move, 
you not, papa? i suppos we shall have veri littl monei. i am sure 
hope some on will help us.” and mr. vinci had said, “ye, child, 
don’t mind a hundr or two. i can see the end of that.” with 
except she had sat at home in languid melancholi and suspens,
fix her mind on will ladislaw’s come as the on point of hope 
interest, and associ thi with some new urgenc on lydgat to 
immedi arrang for leav middlemarch and go to london,
till she felt assur that the come would be a potent caus of 
go, without at all see how. thi wai of establish sequenc 
too common to be fairli regard as a peculiar folli in rosamond. 
it is precis thi sort of sequenc which caus the greatest 
when it is sunder: for to see how an effect mai be produc is 
to see possibl miss and check; but to see noth except 
desir caus, and close upon it the desir effect, rid us 
doubt and make our mind strongli intuit. that wa the 
go on in poor rosamond, while she arrang all object around 
with the same niceti as ever, onli with more slow—or sat down 
the piano, mean to plai, and then desist, yet linger on 
music stool with her white finger suspend on the wooden front, 
look befor her in dreami ennui. her melancholi had becom so 
that lydgat felt a strang timid befor it, as a perpetu 
reproach, and the strong man, master by hi keen 
toward thi fair fragil creatur whose life he seem somehow to 
bruis, shrank from her look, and sometim start at her approach,
fear of her and fear for her rush in onli the more forcibl after 
had been momentarili expel by exasper.

but thi morn rosamond descend from her room upstair—where 
sometim sat the whole dai when lydgat wa out—equip for a walk 
the town. she had a letter to post—a letter address to mr. 
and written with charm discret, but intend to hasten 
arriv by a hint of troubl. the servant-maid, their 
hous-servant now, notic her come down-stair in her walk dress,
and thought “there never did anybodi look so pretti in a bonnet 
thing.”

meanwhil dorothea’s mind wa fill with her project of go 
rosamond, and with the mani thought, both of the past and the 
futur, which gather round the idea of that visit. until 
when lydgat had open to her a glimps of some troubl in hi 
life, the imag of mr. lydgat had alwai been associ for her 
that of will ladislaw. even in her most uneasi moment—even when 
had been agit by mr. cadwallad’s painfulli graphic report 
gossip—her effort, nai, her strongest impuls prompt, had 
toward the vindic of will from ani sulli surmis; and when,
in her meet with him afterward, she had at first interpret 
word as a probabl allus to a feel toward mr. lydgat which 
wa determin to cut himself off from indulg, she had had a quick,
sad, excus vision of the charm there might be in hi 
opportun of companionship with that fair creatur, who most 
share hi other tast as she evid did hi delight in music. 
there had follow hi part word—the few passion word in 
he had impli that she herself wa the object of whom hi love 
him in dread, that it wa hi love for her onli which he wa 
not to declar but to carri awai into banish. from the time of 
part, dorothea, believ in will’s love for her, believ with 
proud delight in hi delic sens of honor and hi determin 
no on should impeach him justli, felt her heart quit at rest as 
the regard he might have for mr. lydgat. she wa sure that the 
wa blameless.

there ar natur in which, if thei love us, we ar consciou of 
a sort of baptism and consecr: thei bind us over to rectitud 
puriti by their pure belief about us; and our sin becom that 
kind of sacrileg which tear down the invis altar of trust. “
you ar not good, none is good”—those littl word mai give a 
mean to respons, mai hold a vitriol intens for remors.

dorothea’s natur wa of that kind: her own passion fault lai 
the easili count open channel of her ardent charact; and while 
wa full of piti for the visibl mistak of other, she had not 
ani materi within her experi for subtl construct 
suspicion of hidden wrong. but that simplic of her, hold up 
ideal for other in her believ concept of them, wa on of 
great power of her womanhood. and it had from the first act 
on will ladislaw. he felt, when he part from her, that the 
word by which he had tri to convei to her hi feel about 
and the divis which her fortun made between them, would onli 
by their breviti when dorothea had to interpret them: he felt that 
her mind he had found hi highest estim.

and he wa right there. in the month sinc their part dorothea 
felt a delici though sad repos in their relat to each other, 
on which wa inwardli whole and without blemish. she had an 
forc of antagon within her, when the antagon turn on 
defenc either of plan or person that she believ in; and the 
which she felt that will had receiv from her husband, and 
extern condit which to other were ground for slight him,
onli gave the more tenac to her affect and admir judgment. 
now with the disclosur about bulstrod had come anoth 
affect will’s social posit, which rous afresh dorothea’s 
resist to what wa said about him in that part of her world 
lai within park pale.

“young ladislaw the grandson of a thiev jew pawnbrok” wa a 
which had enter emphat into the dialogu about the 
busi, at lowick, tipton, and freshitt, and wa a wors kind 
placard on poor will’s back than the “italian with white mice.” 
sir jame chettam wa convinc that hi own satisfact wa 
when he thought with some complac that here wa an ad leagu 
that mountain distanc between ladislaw and dorothea, which 
him to dismiss ani anxieti in that direct as too absurd. and 
there had been some pleasur in point mr. brook’s attent to 
ugli bit of ladislaw’s genealog, as a fresh candl for him to see 
own folli by. dorothea had observ the animu with which will’s 
in the pain stori had been recal more than onc; but she 
utter no word, be check now, as she had not been formerli 
speak of will, by the conscious of a deeper relat 
them which must alwai remain in consecr secreci. but her 
shroud her resist emot into a more thorough glow; and 
misfortun in will’s lot which, it seem, other were wish to 
at hi back as an opprobrium, onli gave someth more of enthusiasm 
her cling thought.

she entertain no vision of their ever come into nearer union, 
yet she had taken no postur of renunci. she had accept 
whole relat to will veri simpli as part of her marriag sorrow, 
would have thought it veri sin in her to keep up an inward 
becaus she wa not complet happi, be rather dispos to dwell 
the superflu of her lot. she could bear that the chief 
of her tender should lie in memori, and the idea of marriag 
to her sole as a repuls proposit from some suitor of whom 
at present knew noth, but whose merit, as seen by her friend,
would be a sourc of torment to her:—“somebodi who will manag 
properti for you, my dear,” wa mr. brook’s attract suggest 
suitabl characterist. “i should like to manag it myself, if i 
what to do with it,” said dorothea. no—she adher to her 
that she would never be marri again, and in the long vallei of 
life which look so flat and empti of waymark, guidanc would come 
she walk along the road, and saw her fellow-passeng by the wai.

thi habitu state of feel about will ladislaw had been strong 
all her wake hour sinc she had propos to pai a visit to mr.
lydgat, make a sort of background against which she saw rosamond’
figur present to her without hindranc to her interest 
compass. there wa evid some mental separ, some barrier 
complet confid which had arisen between thi wife and the 
who had yet made her happi a law to him. that wa a troubl 
no third person must directli touch. but dorothea thought with 
piti of the loneli which must have come upon rosamond from 
suspicion cast on her husband; and there would sure be help in 
manifest of respect for lydgat and sympathi with her.

“i shall talk to her about her husband,” thought dorothea, as she 
be driven toward the town. the clear spring morn, the scent 
the moist earth, the fresh leav just show their creas-up 
of greeneri from out their half-open sheath, seem part of 
cheer she wa feel from a long convers with mr.
farebroth, who had joyfulli accept the justifi explan 
lydgat’s conduct. “i shall take mr. lydgat good new, and 
she will like to talk to me and make a friend of me.”

dorothea had anoth errand in lowick gate: it wa about a 
fine-tone bell for the school-hous, and as she had to get out of 
carriag veri near to lydgat’s, she walk thither across the street,
have told the coachman to wait for some packag. the street door 
open, and the servant wa take the opportun of look out at 
carriag which wa paus within sight when it becam appar to 
that the ladi who “belong to it” wa come toward her.

“is mr. lydgat at home?” said dorothea.

“i’m not sure, my ladi; i’ll see, if you’ll pleas to walk in,” 
martha, a littl confus on the score of her kitchen apron, 
collect enough to be sure that “mum” wa not the right titl for 
queenli young widow with a carriag and pair. “will you pleas to 
in, and i’ll go and see.”

“sai that i am mr. casaubon,” said dorothea, as martha move 
intend to show her into the draw-room and then to go up-stair 
see if rosamond had return from her walk.

thei cross the broader part of the entranc-hall, and turn up 
passag which led to the garden. the draw-room door wa unlatch,
and martha, push it without look into the room, wait for mr.
casaubon to enter and then turn awai, the door have swung open 
swung back again without nois.

dorothea had less of outward vision than usual thi morn, 
fill with imag of thing as thei had been and were go to be. 
found herself on the other side of the door without see 
remark, but immedi she heard a voic speak in low 
which startl her as with a sens of dream in daylight, 
advanc unconsci a step or two beyond the project slab of 
bookcas, she saw, in the terribl illumin of a certainti 
fill up all outlin, someth which made her paus, motionless,
without self-possess enough to speak.

seat with hi back toward her on a sofa which stood against the 
on a line with the door by which she had enter, she saw 
ladislaw: close by him and turn toward him with a 
tear which gave a new brillianc to her face sat rosamond, 
bonnet hang back, while will lean toward her clasp both 
uprais hand in hi and spoke with low-tone fervor.

rosamond in her agit absorpt had not notic the 
advanc figur; but when dorothea, after the first 
instant of thi vision, move confusedli backward and found 
imped by some piec of furnitur, rosamond wa suddenli awar of 
presenc, and with a spasmod movement snatch awai her hand 
rose, look at dorothea who wa necessarili arrest. will ladislaw,
start up, look round also, and meet dorothea’s ey with a 
lightn in them, seem chang to marbl. but she 
turn them awai from him to rosamond and said in a firm voic—

“excus me, mr. lydgat, the servant did not know that you were here.
i call to deliv an import letter for mr. lydgat, which i 
to put into your own hand.”

she laid down the letter on the small tabl which had check 
retreat, and then includ rosamond and will in on distant glanc 
bow, she went quickli out of the room, meet in the passag 
surpris martha, who said she wa sorri the mistress wa not at home,
and then show the strang ladi out with an inward reflect 
grand peopl were probabl more impati than other.

dorothea walk across the street with her most elast step and 
quickli in her carriag again.

“drive on to freshitt hall,” she said to the coachman, and ani 
look at her might have thought that though she wa paler than 
she wa never anim by a more self-possess energi. and that 
realli her experi. it wa as if she had drunk a great draught 
scorn that stimul her beyond the suscept to other feel.
she had seen someth so far below her belief, that her 
rush back from it and made an excit throng without an object. 
need someth activ to turn her excit out upon. she felt 
to walk and work for a dai, without meat or drink. and she would 
out the purpos with which she had start in the morn, of go 
freshitt and tipton to tell sir jame and her uncl all that she 
them to know about lydgat, whose marri loneli under hi 
now present itself to her with new signific, and made her 
ardent in readi to be hi champion. she had never felt 
like thi triumphant power of indign in the struggl of 
marri life, in which there had alwai been a quickli subdu pang;
and she took it as a sign of new strength.

“dodo, how veri bright your ey ar!” said celia, when sir jame 
gone out of the room. “and you don’t see anyth you look at, 
or anyth. you ar go to do someth uncomfort, i know. is 
all about mr. lydgat, or ha someth els happen?” celia had 
us to watch her sister with expect.

“ye, dear, a great mani thing have happen,” said dodo, in her 
tone.

“i wonder what,” said celia, fold her arm cozili and 
forward upon them.

“oh, all the troubl of all peopl on the face of the earth,” 
dorothea, lift her arm to the back of her head.

“dear me, dodo, ar you go to have a scheme for them?” said celia, 
littl uneasi at thi hamlet-like rave.

but sir jame came in again, readi to accompani dorothea to the grang,
and she finish her expedit well, not swerv in her 
until she descend at her own door.




chapter lxxviii.

“would it were yesterdai and i i’ the grave,
with her sweet faith abov for monument.”


rosamond and will stood motionless—thei did not know how long—
look toward the spot where dorothea had stood, and she 
toward him with doubt. it seem an endless time to rosamond, in 
inmost soul there wa hardli so much annoy as gratif 
what had just happen. shallow natur dream of an easi swai over 
emot of other, trust implicitli in their own petti magic 
turn the deepest stream, and confid, by pretti gestur 
remark, of make the thing that is not as though it were. she 
that will had receiv a sever blow, but she had been littl us 
imagin other peopl’s state of mind except as a materi cut 
shape by her own wish; and she believ in her own power to sooth 
subdu. even tertiu, that most pervers of men, wa alwai subdu 
the long-run: event had been obstin, but still rosamond would 
said now, as she did befor her marriag, that she never gave up 
she had set her mind on.

she put out her arm and laid the tip of her finger on will’
coat-sleev.

“don’t touch me!” he said, with an utter like the cut of a lash,
dart from her, and chang from pink to white and back again, as 
hi whole frame were tingl with the pain of the sting. he 
round to the other side of the room and stood opposit to her, with 
tip of hi finger in hi pocket and hi head thrown back, 
fierc not at rosamond but at a point a few inch awai from her.

she wa keenli offend, but the sign she made of thi were such 
onli lydgat wa us to interpret. she becam suddenli quiet 
seat herself, unti her hang bonnet and lai it down with 
shawl. her littl hand which she fold befor her were veri cold.

it would have been safer for will in the first instanc to have 
up hi hat and gone awai; but he had felt no impuls to do thi; on 
contrari, he had a horribl inclin to stai and shatter 
with hi anger. it seem as imposs to bear the fatal she 
drawn down on him without vent hi furi as it would be to a 
to bear the javelin-wound without spring and bite. and yet—
could he tell a woman that he wa readi to curs her? he wa 
under a repress law which he wa forc to acknowledg: he 
danger pois, and rosamond’s voic now brought the 
vibrat. in flute-like tone of sarcasm she said—

“you can easili go after mr. casaubon and explain your prefer.”

“go after her!” he burst out, with a sharp edg in hi voic. “do 
think she would turn to look at me, or valu ani word i ever utter 
her again at more than a dirti feather?—explain! how can a man 
at the expens of a woman?”

“you can tell her what you pleas,” said rosamond with more tremor.

“do you suppos she would like me better for sacrif you? she 
not a woman to be flatter becaus i made myself despic—to 
that i must be true to her becaus i wa a dastard to you.”

he began to move about with the restless of a wild anim that 
prei but cannot reach it. present he burst out again—

“i had no hope befor—not much—of anyth better to come. but i 
on certainti—that she believ in me. whatev peopl had said or 
about me, she believ in me.—that’s gone! she’ll never again think 
anyth but a paltri pretenc—too nice to take heaven except 
flatter condit, and yet sell myself for ani devil’s chang 
the sly. she’ll think of me as an incarn insult to her, from 
first moment we—”

will stop as if he had found himself grasp someth that 
not be thrown and shatter. he found anoth vent for hi rage 
snatch up rosamond’s word again, as if thei were reptil to 
throttl and flung off.

“explain! tell a man to explain how he drop into hell! explain 
prefer! i never had a _prefer_ for her, ani more than i have 
prefer for breath. no other woman exist by the side of her. 
would rather touch her hand if it were dead, than i would touch 
other woman’s live.”

rosamond, while these poison weapon were be hurl at her, 
almost lose the sens of her ident, and seem to be wake 
some new terribl exist. she had no sens of chill 
repuls, of retic self-justif such as she had known 
lydgat’s most stormi displeasur: all her sensibl wa turn 
a bewild novelti of pain; she felt a new terrifi recoil under 
lash never experienc befor. what anoth natur felt in 
to her own wa be burnt and bitten into her conscious. when 
had ceas to speak she had becom an imag of sicken miseri: 
lip were pale, and her ey had a tearless dismai in them. if it 
been tertiu who stood opposit to her, that look of miseri would 
been a pang to him, and he would have sunk by her side to comfort her,
with that strong-arm comfort which she had often held veri cheap.

let it be forgiven to will that he had no such movement of piti. he 
felt no bond beforehand to thi woman who had spoil the 
treasur of hi life, and he held himself blameless. he knew that 
wa cruel, but he had no relent in him yet.

after he had done speak, he still move about, half in absenc 
mind, and rosamond sat perfectli still. at length will, seem 
bethink himself, took up hi hat, yet stood some moment irresolut. 
had spoken to her in a wai that made a phrase of common 
difficult to utter; and yet, now that he had come to the point of 
awai from her without further speech, he shrank from it as a brutal;
he felt check and stultifi in hi anger. he walk toward 
mantel-piec and lean hi arm on it, and wait in silenc for—
hardli knew what. the vindict fire wa still burn in him, and 
could utter no word of retract; but it wa nevertheless in 
mind that have come back to thi hearth where he had enjoi 
caress friendship he had found calam seat there—he had 
suddenli reveal to him a troubl that lai outsid the home as well 
within it. and what seem a forebod wa press upon him as 
slow pincer:—that hi life might come to be enslav by thi 
woman who had thrown herself upon him in the dreari sad of 
heart. but he wa in gloomi rebellion against the fact that hi 
apprehens foreshadow to him, and when hi ey fell 
rosamond’s blight face it seem to him that he wa the more 
of the two; for pain must enter into it glorifi life of 
befor it can turn into compass.

and so thei remain for mani minut, opposit each other, far apart,
in silenc; will’s face still possess by a mute rage, and rosamond’
by a mute miseri. the poor thing had no forc to fling out ani 
in return; the terribl collaps of the illus toward which all 
hope had been strain wa a stroke which had too thoroughli 
her: her littl world wa in ruin, and she felt herself totter 
the midst as a lone bewild conscious.

will wish that she would speak and bring some mitig 
across hi own cruel speech, which seem to stand stare at them 
in mockeri of ani attempt at reviv fellowship. but she said noth,
and at last with a desper effort over himself, he ask, “shall 
come in and see lydgat thi even?”

“if you like,” rosamond answer, just audibl.

and then will went out of the hous, martha never know that he 
been in.

after he wa gone, rosamond tri to get up from her seat, but 
back faint. when she came to herself again, she felt too ill to 
the exert of rise to ring the bell, and she remain 
until the girl, surpris at her long absenc, thought for the 
time of look for her in all the down-stair room. rosamond 
that she had felt suddenli sick and faint, and want to be 
up-stair. when there she threw herself on the bed with her cloth on,
and lai in appar torpor, as she had done onc befor on a 
dai of grief.

lydgat came home earlier than he had expect, about half-past five,
and found her there. the percept that she wa ill threw everi 
thought into the background. when he felt her puls, her ey rest 
him with more persist than thei had done for a long while, as 
she felt some content that he wa there. he perceiv the differ 
a moment, and seat himself by her put hi arm gentli under her, 
bend over her said, “my poor rosamond! ha someth agit you?”
cling to him she fell into hyster sob and cri, and 
the next hour he did noth but sooth and tend her. he imagin 
dorothea had been to see her, and that all thi effect on her 
system, which evid involv some new turn toward himself, 
due to the excit of the new impress which that visit 
rais.




chapter lxxix.

“now, i saw in my dream, that just as thei had end their talk, 
drew nigh to a veri miri slough, that wa in the midst of the plain;
and thei, be heedless, did both fall suddenli into the bog. the 
of the slough wa despond.”—bunyan.


when rosamond wa quiet, and lydgat had left her, hope that 
might soon sleep under the effect of an anodyn, he went into 
draw-room to fetch a book which he had left there, mean to 
the even in hi work-room, and he saw on the tabl dorothea’s 
address to him. he had not ventur to ask rosamond if mr. 
had call, but the read of thi letter assur him of the fact, 
dorothea mention that it wa to be carri by herself.

when will ladislaw came in a littl later lydgat met him with 
surpris which made it clear that he had not been told of the 
visit, and will could not sai, “did not mr. lydgat tell you that 
came thi morn?”

“poor rosamond is ill,” lydgat ad immedi on hi greet.

“not serious, i hope,” said will.

“no—onli a slight nervou shock—the effect of some agit. she 
been overwrought late. the truth is, ladislaw, i am an unlucki devil.
we have gone through sever round of purgatori sinc you left, and 
have late got on to a wors ledg of it than ever. i suppos you 
onli just come down—you look rather batter—you have not been 
enough in the town to hear anyth?”

“i travel all night and got to the white hart at eight o’clock 
morn. i have been shut myself up and rest,” said will,
feel himself a sneak, but see no altern to thi evas.

and then he heard lydgat’s account of the troubl which rosamond 
alreadi depict to him in her wai. she had not mention the fact 
will’s name be connect with the public stori—thi detail 
immedi affect her—and he now heard it for the first time.

“i thought it better to tell you that your name is mix up with 
disclosur,” said lydgat, who could understand better than most 
how ladislaw might be stung by the revel. “you will be sure 
hear it as soon as you turn out into the town. i suppos it is 
that raffl spoke to you.”

“ye,” said will, sardon. “i shall be fortun if gossip 
not make me the most disreput person in the whole affair. i 
think the latest version must be, that i plot with raffl to 
bulstrod, and ran awai from middlemarch for the purpos.”

he wa think “here is a new ring in the sound of my name 
recommend it in her hear; howev—what doe it signifi now?”

but he said noth of bulstrod’s offer to him. will wa veri open 
careless about hi person affair, but it wa among the 
exquisit touch in natur’s model of him that he had a 
generos which warn him into retic here. he shrank from 
that he had reject bulstrod’s monei, in the moment when he 
learn that it wa lydgat’s misfortun to have accept it.

lydgat too wa retic in the midst of hi confid. he made 
allus to rosamond’s feel under their troubl, and of dorothea 
onli said, “mr. casaubon ha been the on person to come forward 
sai that she had no belief in ani of the suspicion against me.”
observ a chang in will’s face, he avoid ani further mention 
her, feel himself too ignor of their relat to each other 
to fear that hi word might have some hidden pain bear on it.
and it occur to him that dorothea wa the real caus of the 
visit to middlemarch.

the two men were piti each other, but it wa onli will who 
the extent of hi companion’s troubl. when lydgat spoke 
desper resign of go to settl in london, and said with 
faint smile, “we shall have you again, old fellow,” will 
inexpress mourn, and said noth. rosamond had that 
entreat him to urg thi step on lydgat; and it seem to him as 
he were behold in a magic panorama a futur where he himself 
slide into that pleasureless yield to the small solicit 
circumst, which is a common histori of perdit than ani 
moment bargain.

we ar on a peril margin when we begin to look passiv at 
futur selv, and see our own figur led with dull consent 
insipid misdo and shabbi achiev. poor lydgat wa 
groan on that margin, and will wa arriv at it. it seem to 
thi even as if the cruelti of hi outburst to rosamond had made 
oblig for him, and he dread the oblig: he dread lydgat’
unsuspect good-will: he dread hi own distast for hi 
life, which would leav him in motiveless leviti.




chapter lxxx.

stern lawgiv! yet thou dost 
the godhead’s most benign grace;
nor know we anyth so 
as is the smile upon thy face;
flower laugh befor thee on their bed,
and fragranc in thy foot tread;
thou dost preserv the star from wrong;
and the most ancient heaven, through thee, ar fresh and strong.
—wordsworth: _od to duti_.


when dorothea had seen mr. farebroth in the morn, she had 
to go and dine at the parsonag on her return from freshitt. there 
a frequent interchang of visit between her and the 
famili, which enabl her to sai that she wa not at all lone at 
manor, and to resist for the present the sever prescript of a 
companion. when she reach home and rememb her engag, she 
glad of it; and find that she had still an hour befor she 
dress for dinner, she walk straight to the schoolhous and 
into a convers with the master and mistress about the new bell,
give eager attent to their small detail and repetit, 
get up a dramat sens that her life wa veri busi. she paus 
her wai back to talk to old master bunnei who wa put in 
garden-seed, and discours wise with that rural sage about 
crop that would make the most return on a perch of ground, and 
result of sixti year’ experi as to soil—name, that if your 
wa pretti mellow it would do, but if there came wet, wet, wet to 
it all of a mummi, why then—

find that the social spirit had beguil her into be rather late,
she dress hastili and went over to the parsonag rather earlier 
wa necessari. that hous wa never dull, mr. farebroth, like 
white of selborn, have continu someth new to tell of 
inarticul guest and _proteg_, whom he wa teach the boi 
to torment; and he had just set up a pair of beauti goat to be 
of the villag in gener, and to walk at larg as sacr anim. 
even went by cheerfulli till after tea, dorothea talk more 
usual and dilat with mr. farebroth on the possibl histori 
creatur that convers compendi with their antenna, and 
aught we know mai hold reform parliament; when suddenli 
inarticul littl sound were heard which call everybodi’
attent.

“henrietta nobl,” said mr. farebroth, see her small 
move about the furnitur-leg distressfulli, “what is the matter?”

“i have lost my tortois-shell lozeng-box. i fear the kitten 
roll it awai,” said the tini old ladi, involuntarili continu 
beaver-like note.

“is it a great treasur, aunt?” said mr. farebroth, put up 
glass and look at the carpet.

“mr. ladislaw gave it me,” said miss nobl. “a german box—veri pretti,
but if it fall it alwai spin awai as far as it can.”

“oh, if it is ladislaw’s present,” said mr. farebroth, in a deep 
of comprehens, get up and hunt. the box wa found at 
under a chiffoni, and miss nobl grasp it with delight, sai, “
wa under a fender the last time.”

“that is an affair of the heart with my aunt,” said mr. farebroth,
smile at dorothea, as he reseat himself.

“if henrietta nobl form an attach to ani on, mr. casaubon,”
said hi mother, emphat,—“she is like a dog—she would take 
shoe for a pillow and sleep the better.”

“mr. ladislaw’s shoe, i would,” said henrietta nobl.

dorothea made an attempt at smile in return. she wa surpris 
annoi to find that her heart wa palpit violent, and that 
wa quit useless to try after a recoveri of her former anim.
alarm at herself—fear some further betray of a chang so 
in it occas, she rose and said in a low voic with 
anxieti, “i must go; i have overtir myself.”

mr. farebroth, quick in percept, rose and said, “it is true; 
must have half-exhaust yourself in talk about lydgat. that 
of work tell upon on after the excit is over.”

he gave her hi arm back to the manor, but dorothea did not attempt 
speak, even when he said good-night.

the limit of resist wa reach, and she had sunk back 
within the clutch of inescap anguish. dismiss tantripp with 
few faint word, she lock her door, and turn awai from it 
the vacant room she press her hand hard on the top of her head, 
moan out—

“oh, i did love him!”

then came the hour in which the wave of suffer shook her 
thoroughli to leav ani power of thought. she could onli cry in 
whisper, between her sob, after her lost belief which she had 
and kept aliv from a veri littl seed sinc the dai in rome—after 
lost joi of cling with silent love and faith to on who, 
by other, wa worthi in her thought—after her lost woman’s pride 
reign in hi memori—after her sweet dim perspect of hope, 
along some pathwai thei should meet with unchang recognit and 
up the backward year as a yesterdai.

in that hour she repeat what the merci ey of solitud 
look on for ag in the spiritu struggl of man—she 
hard and cold and ach weari to bring her relief from 
mysteri incorpor might of her anguish: she lai on the bare 
and let the night grow cold around her; while her grand woman’s 
wa shaken by sob as if she had been a despair child.

there were two imag—two live form that tore her heart in two, 
if it had been the heart of a mother who seem to see her child 
by the sword, and press on bleed half to her breast while 
gaze goe forth in agoni toward the half which is carri awai by 
ly woman that ha never known the mother’s pang.

here, with the near of an answer smile, here within 
vibrat bond of mutual speech, wa the bright creatur whom she 
trust—who had come to her like the spirit of morn visit the 
vault where she sat as the bride of a worn-out life; and now, with 
full conscious which had never awaken befor, she stretch 
her arm toward him and cri with bitter cri that their 
wa a part vision: she discov her passion to herself in 
unshrink utter of despair.

and there, aloof, yet persist with her, move wherev she move,
wa the will ladislaw who wa a chang belief exhaust of hope, 
detect illus—no, a live man toward whom there could not 
struggl ani wail of regret piti, from the midst of scorn 
indign and jealou offend pride. the fire of dorothea’s 
wa not easili spent, and it flame out in fit return of 
reproach. why had he come obtrud hi life into her, her that 
have been whole enough without him? why had he brought hi cheap 
and hi lip-born word to her who had noth paltri to give 
exchang? he knew that he wa delud her—wish, in the veri 
of farewel, to make her believ that he gave her the whole price 
her heart, and knew that he had spent it half befor. why had he 
stai among the crowd of whom she ask noth—but onli prai 
thei might be less contempt?

but she lost energi at last even for her loud-whisper cri 
moan: she subsid into helpless sob, and on the cold floor 
sob herself to sleep.

in the chill hour of the morn twilight, when all wa dim 
her, she awok—not with ani amaz wonder where she wa or what 
happen, but with the clearest conscious that she wa look 
the ey of sorrow. she rose, and wrap warm thing around her, 
seat herself in a great chair where she had often watch befor. 
wa vigor enough to have born that hard night without feel 
in bodi, beyond some ach and fatigu; but she had wake to a 
condit: she felt as if her soul had been liber from it 
conflict; she wa no longer wrestl with her grief, but could 
down with it as a last companion and make it a sharer in 
thought. for now the thought came thickli. it wa not in dorothea’
natur, for longer than the durat of a paroxysm, to sit in 
narrow cell of her calam, in the besot miseri of a 
that onli see anoth’s lot as an accid of it own.

she began now to live through that yesterdai morn 
again, forc herself to dwell on everi detail and it 
mean. wa she alon in that scene? wa it her event onli? she 
herself to think of it as bound up with anoth woman’s life—a 
toward whom she had set out with a long to carri some clear 
comfort into her becloud youth. in her first outleap of 
indign and disgust, when quit the hate room, she had 
awai all the merci with which she had undertaken that visit. she 
envelop both will and rosamond in her burn scorn, and it seem 
her as if rosamond were burn out of her sight forev. but that 
prompt which make a women more cruel to a rival than to a 
lover, could have no strength of recurr in dorothea when 
domin spirit of justic within her had onc overcom the tumult 
had onc shown her the truer measur of thing. all the activ 
with which she had befor been repres to herself the trial 
lydgat’s lot, and thi young marriag union which, like her own,
seem to have it hidden as well as evid troubl—all thi 
sympathet experi return to her now as a power: it 
itself as acquir knowledg assert itself and will not let us see 
we saw in the dai of our ignor. she said to her own 
grief, that it should make her more help, instead of drive 
back from effort.

and what sort of crisi might not thi be in three live whose 
with her laid an oblig on her as if thei had been 
bear the sacr branch? the object of her rescu were not to 
sought out by her fanci: thei were chosen for her. she yearn 
the perfect right, that it might make a throne within her, and rule 
errant will. “what should i do—how should i act now, thi veri dai, 
i could clutch my own pain, and compel it to silenc, and think 
those three?”

it had taken long for her to come to that question, and there wa 
pierc into the room. she open her curtain, and look out 
the bit of road that lai in view, with field beyond outsid 
entranc-gate. on the road there wa a man with a bundl on hi 
and a woman carri her babi; in the field she could see 
move—perhap the shepherd with hi dog. far off in the bend 
wa the pearli light; and she felt the larg of the world and 
manifold wake of men to labor and endur. she wa a part of 
involuntari, palpit life, and could neither look out on it 
her luxuri shelter as a mere spectat, nor hide her ey in 
complain.

what she would resolv to do that dai did not yet seem quit clear, 
someth that she could achiev stir her as with an 
murmur which would soon gather distinct. she took off the 
which seem to have some of the weari of a hard watch in them,
and began to make her toilet. present she rang for tantripp, who 
in her dress-gown.

“why, madam, you’ve never been in bed thi bless night,” burst 
tantripp, look first at the bed and then at dorothea’s face, 
in spite of bath had the pale cheek and pink eyelid of a 
dolorosa. “you’ll kill yourself, you _will_. anybodi might think 
you had a right to give yourself a littl comfort.”

“don’t be alarm, tantripp,” said dorothea, smile. “i have slept; 
am not ill. i shall be glad of a cup of coffe as soon as possibl. 
i want you to bring me my new dress; and most like i shall want 
new bonnet to-dai.”

“thei’ve lain there a month and more readi for you, madam, and 
thank i shall be to see you with a coupl o’ pound’ worth less 
crape,” said tantripp, stoop to light the fire. “there’s a reason 
mourn, as i’ve alwai said; and three fold at the bottom of 
skirt and a plain quill in your bonnet—and if ever anybodi 
like an angel, it’s you in a net quill—is what’s consist for 
second year. at least, that’s _my_ think,” end tantripp, 
anxious at the fire; “and if anybodi wa to marri me 
himself i should wear those hijeou weeper two year for him, he’d 
deceiv by hi own vaniti, that’s all.”

“the fire will do, my good tan,” said dorothea, speak as she us 
do in the old lausann dai, onli with a veri low voic; “get me 
coffe.”

she fold herself in the larg chair, and lean her head against 
in fatigu quiescenc, while tantripp went awai wonder at 
strang contrari in her young mistress—that just the morn 
she had more of a widow’s face than ever, she should have ask for 
lighter mourn which she had waiv befor. tantripp would never 
found the clew to thi mysteri. dorothea wish to acknowledg that 
had not the less an activ life befor her becaus she had buri 
privat joi; and the tradit that fresh garment belong to 
initi, haunt her mind, made her grasp after even that 
outward help toward calm resolv. for the resolv wa not easi.

nevertheless at eleven o’clock she wa walk toward middlemarch,
have made up her mind that she would make as quietli and 
as possibl her second attempt to see and save rosamond.




chapter lxxxi.

du erd warst auch dies nacht beständig,
und athmest neu erquickt zu meinen füssen,
beginnest schon mit lust mich zu umgeben,
du regst und rührst ein kräftige 
_zum höchsten dasein immerfort zu streben_.
—_faust:_ 2r theil.


when dorothea wa again at lydgat’s door speak to martha, he wa 
the room close by with the door ajar, prepar to go out. he heard 
voic, and immedi came to her.

“do you think that mr. lydgat can receiv me thi morn?” she said,
have reflect that it would be better to leav out all allus 
her previou visit.

“i have no doubt she will,” said lydgat, suppress hi thought 
dorothea’s look, which were as much chang as rosamond’s, “if 
will be kind enough to come in and let me tell her that you ar here.
she ha not been veri well sinc you were here yesterdai, but she 
better thi morn, and i think it is veri like that she will 
cheer by see you again.”

it wa plain that lydgat, as dorothea had expect, knew noth 
the circumst of her yesterdai’s visit; nai, he appear to 
that she had carri it out accord to her intent. she 
prepar a littl note ask rosamond to see her, which she would 
given to the servant if he had not been in the wai, but now she wa 
much anxieti as to the result of hi announc.

after lead her into the draw-room, he paus to take a 
from hi pocket and put it into her hand, sai, “i wrote thi 
night, and wa go to carri it to lowick in my ride. when on 
grate for someth too good for common thank, write is 
unsatisfactori than speech—on doe not at least _hear_ how 
the word ar.”

dorothea’s face brighten. “it is i who have most to thank for, 
you have let me take that place. you _have_ consent?” she said,
suddenli doubt.

“ye, the check is go to bulstrod to-dai.”

he said no more, but went up-stair to rosamond, who had but 
finish dress herself, and sat languidli wonder what she 
do next, her habitu industri in small thing, even in the dai of 
sad, prompt her to begin some kind of occup, which 
drag through slowli or paus in from lack of interest. she 
ill, but had recov her usual quietud of manner, and lydgat 
fear to disturb her by ani question. he had told her of dorothea’
letter contain the check, and afterward he had said, “ladislaw 
come, rosi; he sat with me last night; i dare sai he will be here 
to-dai. i thought he look rather batter and depress.” 
rosamond had made no repli.

now, when he came up, he said to her veri gentli, “rosi, dear, mr.
casaubon is come to see you again; you would like to see her, would 
not?” that she color and gave rather a startl movement did 
surpris him after the agit produc by the interview yesterdai—
benefic agit, he thought, sinc it seem to have made her 
to him again.

rosamond dare not sai no. she dare not with a tone of her voic 
the fact of yesterdai. why had mr. casaubon come again? the 
wa a blank which rosamond could onli fill up with dread, for 
ladislaw’s lacer word had made everi thought of dorothea a 
smart to her. nevertheless, in her new humili uncertainti 
dare do noth but compli. she did not sai ye, but she rose and 
lydgat put a light shawl over her shoulder, while he said, “i 
go out immedi.” then someth cross her mind which 
her to sai, “prai tell martha not to bring ani on els into 
draw-room.” and lydgat assent, think that he fulli 
thi wish. he led her down to the draw-room door, and then 
awai, observ to himself that he wa rather a blunder husband 
be depend for hi wife’s trust in him on the influenc of 
woman.

rosamond, wrap her soft shawl around her as she walk 
dorothea, wa inwardli wrap her soul in cold reserv. had mr.
casaubon come to sai anyth to her about will? if so, it wa 
liberti that rosamond resent; and she prepar herself to meet 
word with polit impass. will had bruis her pride too 
for her to feel ani compunct toward him and dorothea: her 
injuri seem much the greater. dorothea wa not onli the “prefer”
woman, but had also a formid advantag in be lydgat’
benefactor; and to poor rosamond’s pain confus vision it 
that thi mr. casaubon—thi woman who predomin in all 
concern her—must have come now with the sens of have 
advantag, and with animos prompt her to us it. inde, 
rosamond onli, but ani on els, know the outer fact of the case,
and not the simpl inspir on which dorothea act, might well 
wonder why she came.

look like the love ghost of herself, her grace slim 
in her soft white shawl, the round infantin mouth and 
inevit suggest mild and innoc, rosamond paus at 
yard’ distanc from her visitor and bow. but dorothea, who had 
off her glove, from an impuls which she could never resist when 
want a sens of freedom, came forward, and with her face full of 
sad yet sweet open, put out her hand. rosamond could not 
meet her glanc, could not avoid put her small hand 
dorothea’s, which clasp it with gentl motherli; and 
a doubt of her own prepossess began to stir within her. rosamond’
ey wa quick for face; she saw that mr. casaubon’s face look 
and chang sinc yesterdai, yet gentl, and like the firm soft 
her hand. but dorothea had count a littl too much on her 
strength: the clear and intens of her mental action thi 
were the continu of a nervou exalt which made her frame 
danger respons as a bit of finest venetian crystal; and 
look at rosamond, she suddenli found her heart swell, and 
unabl to speak—all her effort wa requir to keep back tear. 
succeed in that, and the emot onli pass over her face like 
spirit of a sob; but it ad to rosamond’s impress that mr.
casaubon’s state of mind must be someth quit differ from 
she had imagin.

so thei sat down without a word of prefac on the two chair 
happen to be nearest, and happen also to be close togeth; 
rosamond’s notion when she first bow wa that she should stai a 
wai off from mr. casaubon. but she ceas think how anyth 
turn out—mere wonder what would come. and dorothea began to 
quit simpli, gather firm as she went on.

“i had an errand yesterdai which i did not finish; that is why i 
here again so soon. you will not think me too troublesom when i 
you that i came to talk to you about the injustic that ha been 
toward mr. lydgat. it will cheer you—will it not?—to know a 
deal about him, that he mai not like to speak about himself 
becaus it is in hi own vindic and to hi own honor. you 
like to know that your husband ha warm friend, who have not left 
believ in hi high charact? you will let me speak of thi 
think that i take a liberti?”

the cordial, plead tone which seem to flow with 
heedless abov all the fact which had fill rosamond’s mind 
ground of obstruct and hatr between her and thi woman, came 
soothingli as a warm stream over her shrink fear. of cours mr.
casaubon had the fact in her mind, but she wa not go to speak 
anyth connect with them. that relief wa too great for rosamond 
feel much els at the moment. she answer prettili, in the new eas 
her soul—

“i know you have been veri good. i shall like to hear anyth you 
sai to me about tertiu.”

“the dai befor yesterdai,” said dorothea, “when i had ask him 
come to lowick to give me hi opinion on the affair of the hospit,
he told me everyth about hi conduct and feel in thi sad 
which ha made ignor peopl cast suspicion on him. the reason 
told me wa becaus i wa veri bold and ask him. i believ that 
had never act dishonor, and i beg him to tell me the histori.
he confess to me that he had never told it befor, not even to you,
becaus he had a great dislik to sai, ‘i wa not wrong,’ as if 
were proof, when there ar guilti peopl who will sai so. the truth is,
he knew noth of thi man raffl, or that there were ani bad 
about him; and he thought that mr. bulstrod offer him the 
becaus he repent, out of kind, of have refus it befor. 
hi anxieti about hi patient wa to treat him rightli, and he wa 
littl uncomfort that the case did not end as he had expect; 
he thought then and still think that there mai have been no wrong 
it on ani on’s part. and i have told mr. farebroth, and mr. brook,
and sir jame chettam: thei all believ in your husband. that 
cheer you, will it not? that will give you courag?”

dorothea’s face had becom anim, and as it beam on rosamond 
close to her, she felt someth like bash timid befor 
superior, in the presenc of thi self-forget ardor. she said, 
blush embarrass, “thank you: you ar veri kind.”

“and he felt that he had been so wrong not to pour out everyth 
thi to you. but you will forgiv him. it wa becaus he feel so 
more about your happi than anyth els—he feel hi life 
into on with your, and it hurt him more than anyth, that 
misfortun must hurt you. he could speak to me becaus i am 
indiffer person. and then i ask him if i might come to see you;
becaus i felt so much for hi troubl and your. that is why i 
yesterdai, and why i am come to-dai. troubl is so hard to bear, is 
not?— how can we live and think that ani on ha troubl—
troubl—and we could help them, and never try?”

dorothea, complet swai by the feel that she wa utter,
forgot everyth but that she wa speak from out the heart of 
own trial to rosamond’s. the emot had wrought itself more and 
into her utter, till the tone might have gone to on’s 
marrow, like a low cry from some suffer creatur in the dark.
and she had unconsci laid her hand again on the littl hand 
she had press befor.

rosamond, with an overmast pang, as if a wound within her had 
probe, burst into hyster cry as she had done the dai 
when she clung to her husband. poor dorothea wa feel a great 
of her own sorrow return over her—her thought be drawn to 
possibl share that will ladislaw might have in rosamond’s 
tumult. she wa begin to fear that she should not be abl 
suppress herself enough to the end of thi meet, and while her 
wa still rest on rosamond’s lap, though the hand underneath it 
withdrawn, she wa struggl against her own rise sob. she tri 
master herself with the thought that thi might be a turn-point 
three live—not in her own; no, there the irrevoc had happen,
but—in those three live which were touch her with the 
neighborhood of danger and distress. the fragil creatur who 
cry close to her—there might still be time to rescu her from 
miseri of fals incompat bond; and thi moment wa unlik 
other: she and rosamond could never be togeth again with the 
thrill conscious of yesterdai within them both. she felt 
relat between them to be peculiar enough to give her a 
influenc, though she had no concept that the wai in which her 
feel were involv wa fulli known to mr. lydgat.

it wa a newer crisi in rosamond’s experi than even dorothea 
imagin: she wa under the first great shock that had shatter 
dream-world in which she had been easili confid of herself 
critic of other; and thi strang unexpect manifest 
feel in a woman whom she had approach with a shrink 
and dread, as on who must necessarili have a jealou hatr 
her, made her soul totter all the more with a sens that she had 
walk in an unknown world which had just broken in upon her.

when rosamond’s convuls throat wa subsid into calm, and 
withdrew the handkerchief with which she had been hide her face, 
ey met dorothea’s as helplessli as if thei had been blue flower.
what wa the us of think about behavior after thi cry? 
dorothea look almost as childish, with the neglect trace of 
silent tear. pride wa broken down between these two.

“we were talk about your husband,” dorothea said, with 
timid. “i thought hi look were sadli chang with suffer 
other dai. i had not seen him for mani week befor. he said he 
been feel veri lone in hi trial; but i think he would have 
it all better if he had been abl to be quit open with you.”

“tertiu is so angri and impati if i sai anyth,” said rosamond,
imagin that he had been complain of her to dorothea. “he 
not to wonder that i object to speak to him on pain subject.”

“it wa himself he blame for not speak,” said dorothea. “what 
said of you wa, that he could not be happi in do anyth 
made you unhappi—that hi marriag wa of cours a bond which 
affect hi choic about everyth; and for that reason he refus 
propos that he should keep hi posit at the hospit, becaus 
would bind him to stai in middlemarch, and he would not undertak to 
anyth which would be pain to you. he could sai that to me,
becaus he know that i had much trial in my marriag, from 
husband’s ill, which hinder hi plan and sadden him; and 
know that i have felt how hard it is to walk alwai in fear of 
anoth who is ti to us.”

dorothea wait a littl; she had discern a faint pleasur 
over rosamond’s face. but there wa no answer, and she went on, with 
gather tremor, “marriag is so unlik everyth els. there 
someth even aw in the near it bring. even if we love 
on els better than—than those we were marri to, it would be 
us”—poor dorothea, in her palpit anxieti, could onli seiz 
languag brokenli—“i mean, marriag drink up all our power of 
or get ani blessed in that sort of love. i know it mai be 
dear—but it murder our marriag—and then the marriag stai with 
like a murder—and everyth els is gone. and then our husband—if 
love and trust us, and we have not help him, but made a curs 
hi life—”

her voic had sunk veri low: there wa a dread upon her of 
too far, and of speak as if she herself were perfect 
error. she wa too much preoccupi with her own anxieti, to be 
that rosamond wa trembl too; and fill with the need to 
piti fellowship rather than rebuk, she put her hand on rosamond’s,
and said with more agit rapid,—“i know, i know that the 
mai be veri dear—it ha taken hold of us unawar—it is so hard, it 
seem like death to part with it—and we ar weak—i am weak—”

the wave of her own sorrow, from out of which she wa struggl 
save anoth, rush over dorothea with conquer forc. she 
in speechless agit, not cry, but feel as if she were 
inwardli grappl. her face had becom of a deathlier pale, 
lip trembl, and she press her hand helplessli on the hand 
lai under them.

rosamond, taken hold of by an emot stronger than her own—
along in a new movement which gave all thing some new, aw,
undefin aspect—could find no word, but involuntarili she put 
lip to dorothea’s forehead which wa veri near her, and then for 
minut the two women clasp each other as if thei had been in 
shipwreck.

“you ar think what is not true,” said rosamond, in an 
half-whisper, while she wa still feel dorothea’s arm 
her—urg by a mysteri necess to free herself from someth 
oppress her as if it were blood guilti.

thei move apart, look at each other.

“when you came in yesterdai—it wa not as you thought,” said 
in the same tone.

there wa a movement of surpris attent in dorothea. she expect 
vindic of rosamond herself.

“he wa tell me how he love anoth woman, that i might know 
could never love me,” said rosamond, get more and more hurri 
she went on. “and now i think he hate me becaus—becaus you 
him yesterdai. he sai it is through me that you will think ill 
him—think that he is a fals person. but it shall not be through me. 
ha never had ani love for me—i know he ha not—he ha alwai 
slightli of me. he said yesterdai that no other woman exist for 
besid you. the blame of what happen is entir mine. he said 
could never explain to you—becaus of me. he said you could never 
well of him again. but now i have told you, and he cannot reproach 
ani more.”

rosamond had deliv her soul under impuls which she had not 
befor. she had begun her confess under the subdu influenc 
dorothea’s emot; and as she went on she had gather the sens 
she wa repel will’s reproach, which were still like 
knife-wound within her.

the revuls of feel in dorothea wa too strong to be call joi.
it wa a tumult in which the terribl strain of the night and 
made a resist pain:—she could onli perceiv that thi would be 
when she had recov her power of feel it. her 
conscious wa on of immens sympathi without check; she care 
rosamond without struggl now, and respond earnestli to her 
word—

“no, he cannot reproach you ani more.”

with her usual tendenc to over-estim the good in other, she felt 
great outgo of her heart toward rosamond, for the gener 
which had redeem her from suffer, not count that the effort 
a reflex of her own energi. after thei had been silent a littl, 
said—

“you ar not sorri that i came thi morn?”

“no, you have been veri good to me,” said rosamond. “i did not 
that you would be so good. i wa veri unhappi. i am not happi now.
everyth is so sad.”

“but better dai will come. your husband will be rightli valu. and 
depend on you for comfort. he love you best. the worst loss would 
to lose that—and you have not lost it,” said dorothea.

she tri to thrust awai the too overpow thought of her 
relief, lest she should fail to win some sign that rosamond’s 
wa yearn back toward her husband.

“tertiu did not find fault with me, then?” said rosamond,
understand now that lydgat might have said anyth to mr.
casaubon, and that she certainli wa differ from other women.
perhap there wa a faint tast of jealousi in the question. a 
began to plai over dorothea’s face as she said—

“no, inde! how could you imagin it?” but here the door open, 
lydgat enter.

“i am come back in my qualiti of doctor,” he said. “after i went awai,
i wa haunt by two pale face: mr. casaubon look as much in 
of care as you, rosi. and i thought that i had not done my duti 
leav you togeth; so when i had been to coleman’s i came 
again. i notic that you were walk, mr. casaubon, and the sky 
chang—i think we mai have rain. mai i send some on to order 
carriag to come for you?”

“oh, no! i am strong: i need the walk,” said dorothea, rise 
anim in her face. “mr. lydgat and i have chat a great deal,
and it is time for me to go. i have alwai been accus of 
immoder and sai too much.”

she put out her hand to rosamond, and thei said an earnest, 
good-by without kiss or other show of effus: there had been 
them too much seriou emot for them to us the sign of 
superfici.

as lydgat took her to the door she said noth of rosamond, but 
him of mr. farebroth and the other friend who had listen 
belief to hi stori.

when he came back to rosamond, she had alreadi thrown herself on 
sofa, in resign fatigu.

“well, rosi,” he said, stand over her, and touch her hair, “
do you think of mr. casaubon now you have seen so much of her?”

“i think she must be better than ani on,” said rosamond, “and she 
veri beauti. if you go to talk to her so often, you will be 
discont with me than ever!”

lydgat laugh at the “so often.” “but ha she made you ani 
discont with me?”

“i think she ha,” said rosamond, look up in hi face. “how 
your ey ar, tertiu—and do push your hair back.” he lift up 
larg white hand to obei her, and felt thank for thi littl mark 
interest in him. poor rosamond’s vagrant fanci had come back 
scourg—meek enough to nestl under the old despis shelter. and 
shelter wa still there: lydgat had accept hi narrow lot with 
resign. he had chosen thi fragil creatur, and had taken 
burthen of her life upon hi arm. he must walk as he could, 
that burthen pitifulli.




chapter lxxxii.

“my grief li onward and my joi behind.”
—shakespear: _sonnet_.


exil notori feed much on hope, and ar unlik to stai 
banish unless thei ar oblig. when will ladislaw exil 
from middlemarch he had place no stronger obstacl to hi return 
hi own resolv, which wa by no mean an iron barrier, but simpli 
state of mind liabl to melt into a minuet with other state of mind,
and to find itself bow, smile, and give place with 
facil. as the month went on, it had seem more and more 
to him to sai why he should not run down to middlemarch—mere for 
sake of hear someth about dorothea; and if on such a fly 
he should chanc by some strang coincid to meet with her, 
wa no reason for him to be asham of have taken an innoc 
which he had beforehand suppos that he should not take. sinc he 
hopelessli divid from her, he might sure ventur into 
neighborhood; and as to the suspici friend who kept a dragon 
over her—their opinion seem less and less import with time 
chang of air.

and there had come a reason quit irrespect of dorothea, 
seem to make a journei to middlemarch a sort of philanthrop duti.
will had given a disinterest attent to an intend settlement on 
new plan in the far west, and the need for fund in order to carri 
a good design had set him on debat with himself whether it would 
be a laudabl us to make of hi claim on bulstrod, to urg 
applic of that monei which had been offer to himself as a 
of carri out a scheme like to be larg benefici. the 
seem a veri dubiou on to will, and hi repugn to again 
into ani relat with the banker might have made him dismiss 
quickli, if there had not arisen in hi imagin the 
that hi judgment might be more safe determin by a visit 
middlemarch.

that wa the object which will state to himself as a reason for 
down. he had meant to confid in lydgat, and discuss the 
question with him, and he had meant to amus himself for the 
even of hi stai by have a great deal of music and badinag 
fair rosamond, without neglect hi friend at lowick parsonag:—
the parsonag wa close to the manor, that wa no fault of hi. he 
neglect the farebroth befor hi departur, from a 
resist to the possibl accus of indirectli seek 
with dorothea; but hunger tame us, and will had becom veri hungri 
the vision of a certain form and the sound of a certain voic. 
had done instead—not the opera, or the convers of zealou politician,
or the flatter recept (in dim corner) of hi new hand in 
articl.

thu he had come down, forese with confid how almost 
would be in hi familiar littl world; fear, inde, that 
would be no surpris in hi visit. but he had found that humdrum 
in a terribl dynam condit, in which even badinag and lyrism 
turn explos; and the first dai of thi visit had becom the 
fatal epoch of hi life. the next morn he felt so harass with 
nightmar of consequ—he dread so much the immedi 
befor him—that see while he breakfast the arriv of 
riverston coach, he went out hurriedli and took hi place on it, 
he might be reliev, at least for a dai, from the necess of 
or sai anyth in middlemarch. will ladislaw wa in on of 
tangl crise which ar common in experi than on might imagin,
from the shallow absolut of men’s judgment. he had found lydgat,
for whom he had the sincerest respect, under circumst 
claim hi thorough and frankli declar sympathi; and the reason why,
in spite of that claim, it would have been better for will to 
avoid all further intimaci, or even contact, with lydgat, 
precis of the kind to make such a cours appear imposs. to 
creatur of will’s suscept tempera—without ani neutral 
of indiffer in hi natur, readi to turn everyth that befel 
into the collis of a passion drama—the revel that 
had made her happi in ani wai depend on him wa a 
which hi outburst of rage toward her had immeasur increas 
him. he hate hi own cruelti, and yet he dread to show the 
of hi relent: he must go to her again; the friendship could not 
put to a sudden end; and her unhappi wa a power which he dread.
and all the while there wa no more foretast of enjoy in the 
befor him than if hi limb had been lop off and he wa make 
fresh start on crutch. in the night he had debat whether he 
not get on the coach, not for riverston, but for london, leav a 
to lydgat which would give a makeshift reason for hi retreat. 
there were strong cord pull him back from that abrupt departur:
the blight on hi happi in think of dorothea, the crush 
that chief hope which had remain in spite of the 
necess for renunci, wa too fresh a miseri for him to 
himself to it and go straightwai into a distanc which wa 
despair.

thu he did noth more decid than take the riverston coach. 
came back again by it while it wa still daylight, have made up 
mind that he must go to lydgat’s that even. the rubicon, we know,
wa a veri insignific stream to look at; it signific 
entir in certain invis condit. will felt as if he 
forc to cross hi small boundari ditch, and what he saw beyond it 
not empir, but discont subject.

but it is given to us sometim even in our everi-dai life to 
the save influenc of a nobl natur, the divin efficaci of 
that mai lie in a self-subdu act of fellowship. if dorothea, 
her night’s anguish, had not taken that walk to rosamond—why, 
perhap would have been a woman who gain a higher charact 
discret, but it would certainli not have been as well for 
three who were on on hearth in lydgat’s hous at half-past seven 
even.

rosamond had been prepar for will’s visit, and she receiv him 
a languid cold which lydgat account for by her 
exhaust, of which he could not suppos that it had ani relat 
will. and when she sat in silenc bend over a bit of work, 
innoc apolog for her in an indirect wai by beg her to 
backward and rest. will wa miser in the necess for plai 
part of a friend who wa make hi first appear and greet 
rosamond, while hi thought were busi about her feel sinc 
scene of yesterdai, which seem still inexor to enclos them both,
like the pain vision of a doubl mad. it happen that 
call lydgat out of the room; but when rosamond pour out the tea,
and will came near to fetch it, she place a tini bit of fold 
in hi saucer. he saw it and secur it quickli, but as he went back 
hi inn he had no eager to unfold the paper. what rosamond 
written to him would probabl deepen the pain impress of 
even. still, he open and read it by hi bed-candl. there 
onli these few word in her neatli flow hand:—

“i have told mr. casaubon. she is not under ani mistak about you. 
told her becaus she came to see me and wa veri kind. you will 
noth to reproach me with now. i shall not have made ani 
to you.”

the effect of these word wa not quit all glad. as will dwelt 
them with excit imagin, he felt hi cheek and ear burn 
the thought of what had occur between dorothea and rosamond—at 
uncertainti how far dorothea might still feel her digniti wound 
have an explan of hi conduct offer to her. there might 
remain in her mind a chang associ with him which made 
irremedi differ—a last flaw. with activ fanci he 
himself into a state of doubt littl more easi than that of the man 
ha escap from wreck by night and stand on unknown ground in 
dark. until that wretch yesterdai—except the moment of 
long ago in the veri same room and in the veri same presenc—all 
vision, all their thought of each other, had been as in a world apart,
where the sunshin fell on tall white lili, where no evil lurk, 
no other soul enter. but now—would dorothea meet him in that 
again?




chapter lxxxiii.

“and now good-morrow to our wake 
which watch not on anoth out of fear;
for love all love of other sight control,
and make on littl room, an everywher.”
—dr. donn.


on the second morn after dorothea’s visit to rosamond, she had 
two night of sound sleep, and had not onli lost all trace of fatigu,
but felt as if she had a great deal of superflu strength—that is 
sai, more strength than she could manag to concentr on 
occup. the dai befor, she had taken long walk outsid 
ground, and had paid two visit to the parsonag; but she never in 
life told ani on the reason why she spent her time in that 
manner, and thi morn she wa rather angri with herself for 
childish restless. to-dai wa to be spent quit differ. 
wa there to be done in the villag? oh dear! noth. everybodi 
well and had flannel; nobodi’s pig had di; and it wa 
morn, when there wa a gener scrub of door and door-stone,
and when it wa useless to go into the school. but there were 
subject that dorothea wa try to get clear upon, and she 
to throw herself energet into the gravest of all. she sat down 
the librari befor her particular littl heap of book on 
economi and kindr matter, out of which she wa try to get 
as to the best wai of spend monei so as not to injur on’
neighbor, or—what come to the same thing—so as to do them the 
good. here wa a weighti subject which, if she could but lai hold 
it, would certainli keep her mind steadi. unhappili her mind 
off it for a whole hour; and at the end she found herself 
sentenc twice over with an intens conscious of mani thing, 
not of ani on thing contain in the text. thi wa hopeless. 
she order the carriag and drive to tipton? no; for some reason 
other she prefer stai at lowick. but her vagrant mind must 
reduc to order: there wa an art in self-disciplin; and she 
round and round the brown librari consid by what sort of 
she could arrest her wander thought. perhap a mere task wa 
best mean—someth to which she must go doggedli. wa there not 
geographi of asia minor, in which her slack had often been 
by mr. casaubon? she went to the cabinet of map and unrol on: 
morn she might make herself final sure that paphlagonia wa not 
the levantin coast, and fix her total dark about the 
firmli on the shore of the euxin. a map wa a fine thing to 
when you were dispos to think of someth els, be made up 
name that would turn into a chime if you went back upon them. 
set earnestli to work, bend close to her map, and utter the 
in an audibl, subdu tone, which often got into a chime. she 
amusingli girlish after all her deep experi—nod her head 
mark the name off on her finger, with a littl purs of her lip,
and now and then break off to put her hand on each side of her 
and sai, “oh dear! oh dear!”

there wa no reason why thi should end ani more than a merri-go-round;
but it wa at last interrupt by the open of the door and 
announc of miss nobl.

the littl old ladi, whose bonnet hardli reach dorothea’s shoulder,
wa warmli welcom, but while her hand wa be press she made 
of her beaver-like nois, as if she had someth difficult to sai.

“do sit down,” said dorothea, roll a chair forward. “am i want 
anyth? i shall be so glad if i can do anyth.”

“i will not stai,” said miss nobl, put her hand into her 
basket, and hold some articl insid it nervous; “i have left 
friend in the churchyard.” she laps into her inarticul sound, 
unconsci drew forth the articl which she wa finger. it 
the tortois-shell lozeng-box, and dorothea felt the color mount 
her cheek.

“mr. ladislaw,” continu the timid littl woman. “he fear he 
offend you, and ha beg me to ask if you will see him for a 
minut.”

dorothea did not answer on the instant: it wa cross her mind 
she could not receiv him in thi librari, where her husband’
prohibit seem to dwell. she look toward the window. could 
go out and meet him in the ground? the sky wa heavi, and the 
had begun to shiver as at a come storm. besid, she shrank 
go out to him.

“do see him, mr. casaubon,” said miss nobl, pathet; “els 
must go back and sai no, and that will hurt him.”

“ye, i will see him,” said dorothea. “prai tell him to come.”

what els wa there to be done? there wa noth that she long 
at that moment except to see will: the possibl of see him 
thrust itself insist between her and everi other object; and 
she had a throb excit like an alarm upon her—a sens that 
wa do someth daringli defiant for hi sake.

when the littl ladi had trot awai on her mission, dorothea stood 
the middl of the librari with her hand fall clasp befor her,
make no attempt to compos herself in an attitud of 
unconsci. what she wa least consciou of just then wa her 
bodi: she wa think of what wa like to be in will’s mind, and 
the hard feel that other had had about him. how could ani 
bind her to hard? resist to unjust disprais had mingl 
her feel for him from the veri first, and now in the rebound of 
heart after her anguish the resist wa stronger than ever. “if 
love him too much it is becaus he ha been us so ill:”—there wa 
voic within her sai thi to some imagin audienc in the librari,
when the door wa open, and she saw will befor her.

she did not move, and he came toward her with more doubt and 
in hi face than she had ever seen befor. he wa in a state 
uncertainti which made him afraid lest some look or word of hi 
condemn him to a new distanc from her; and dorothea wa afraid of 
_own_ emot. she look as if there were a spell upon her, 
her motionless and hinder her from unclasp her hand, while 
intens, grave yearn wa imprison within her ey. see that 
did not put out her hand as usual, will paus a yard from her and 
with embarrass, “i am so grate to you for see me.”

“i want to see you,” said dorothea, have no other word at command.
it did not occur to her to sit down, and will did not give a 
interpret to thi queenli wai of receiv him; but he went on 
sai what he had made up hi mind to sai.

“i fear you think me foolish and perhap wrong for come back so soon.
i have been punish for my impati. you know—everi on know now—
pain stori about my parentag. i knew of it befor i went awai, 
i alwai meant to tell you of it if—if we ever met again.”

there wa a slight movement in dorothea, and she unclasp her hand,
but immedi fold them over each other.

“but the affair is matter of gossip now,” will continu. “i wish 
to know that someth connect with it—someth which 
befor i went awai, help to bring me down here again. at least 
thought it excus my come. it wa the idea of get bulstrod 
appli some monei to a public purpos—some monei which he had thought 
give me. perhap it is rather to bulstrod’s credit that he 
offer me compens for an old injuri: he offer to give me a 
incom to make amend; but i suppos you know the disagre stori?”

will look doubtfulli at dorothea, but hi manner wa gather 
of the defiant courag with which he alwai thought of thi fact in 
destini. he ad, “you know that it must be altogeth pain to me.”

“ye—ye—i know,” said dorothea, hastili.

“i did not choos to accept an incom from such a sourc. i wa 
that you would not think well of me if i did so,” said will. why 
he mind sai anyth of that sort to her now? she knew that he 
avow hi love for her. “i felt that”—he broke off, nevertheless.

“you act as i should have expect you to act,” said dorothea, 
face brighten and her head becom a littl more erect on 
beauti stem.

“i did not believ that you would let ani circumst of my 
creat a prejudic in you against me, though it wa sure to do so 
other,” said will, shake hi head backward in hi old wai, 
look with a grave appeal into her ey.

“if it were a new hardship it would be a new reason for me to cling 
you,” said dorothea, fervidli. “noth could have chang me but—” 
heart wa swell, and it wa difficult to go on; she made a 
effort over herself to sai in a low tremul voic, “but think 
you were differ—not so good as i had believ you to be.”

“you ar sure to believ me better than i am in everyth but on,”
said will, give wai to hi own feel in the evid of her. “
mean, in my truth to you. when i thought you doubt of that, i didn’
care about anyth that wa left. i thought it wa all over with me,
and there wa noth to try for—onli thing to endur.”

“i don’t doubt you ani longer,” said dorothea, put out her hand; 
vagu fear for him impel her unutter affect.

he took her hand and rais it to hi lip with someth like a sob.
but he stood with hi hat and glove in the other hand, and might 
done for the portrait of a royalist. still it wa difficult to 
the hand, and dorothea, withdraw it in a confus that 
her, look and move awai.

“see how dark the cloud have becom, and how the tree ar toss,”
she said, walk toward the window, yet speak and move with 
a dim sens of what she wa do.

will follow her at a littl distanc, and lean against the 
back of a leather chair, on which he ventur now to lai hi hat 
glove, and free himself from the intoler duranc of formal 
which he had been for the first time condemn in dorothea’s presenc.
it must be confess that he felt veri happi at that moment lean 
the chair. he wa not much afraid of anyth that she might feel now.

thei stood silent, not look at each other, but look at 
evergreen which were be toss, and were show the pale 
of their leav against the blacken sky. will never enjoi 
prospect of a storm so much: it deliv him from the necess 
go awai. leav and littl branch were hurl about, and 
thunder wa get nearer. the light wa more and more sombr, 
there came a flash of lightn which made them start and look at 
other, and then smile. dorothea began to sai what she had been 
of.

“that wa a wrong thing for you to sai, that you would have had 
to try for. if we had lost our own chief good, other peopl’s 
would remain, and that is worth try for. some can be happi. i 
to see that more clearli than ever, when i wa the most wretch. i 
hardli think how i could have born the troubl, if that feel 
not come to me to make strength.”

“you have never felt the sort of miseri i felt,” said will; “the 
of know that you must despis me.”

“but i have felt wors—it wa wors to think ill—” dorothea had 
impetu, but broke off.

will color. he had the sens that whatev she said wa utter 
the vision of a fatal that kept them apart. he wa silent a moment,
and then said passion—

“we mai at least have the comfort of speak to each other 
disguis. sinc i must go awai—sinc we must alwai be divid—you 
think of me as on on the brink of the grave.”

while he wa speak there came a vivid flash of lightn which 
each of them up for the other—and the light seem to be the terror 
a hopeless love. dorothea dart instantan from the window; 
follow her, seiz her hand with a spasmod movement; and so 
stood, with their hand clasp, like two children, look out on 
storm, while the thunder gave a tremend crack and roll abov them,
and the rain began to pour down. then thei turn their face 
each other, with the memori of hi last word in them, and thei did 
loos each other’s hand.

“there is no hope for me,” said will. “even if you love me as well 
i love you—even if i were everyth to you—i shall most like 
be veri poor: on a sober calcul, on can count on noth but 
creep lot. it is imposs for us ever to belong to each other. 
is perhap base of me to have ask for a word from you. i meant to 
awai into silenc, but i have not been abl to do what i meant.”

“don’t be sorri,” said dorothea, in her clear tender tone. “i 
rather share all the troubl of our part.”

her lip trembl, and so did hi. it wa never known which lip 
the first to move toward the other lip; but thei kiss tremblingli,
and then thei move apart.

the rain wa dash against the window-pane as if an angri 
were within it, and behind it wa the great swoop of the wind; it 
on of those moment in which both the busi and the idl paus with 
certain aw.

dorothea sat down on the seat nearest to her, a long low ottoman in 
middl of the room, and with her hand fold over each other on 
lap, look at the drear outer world. will stood still an 
look at her, then seat himself besid her, and laid hi hand 
her, which turn itself upward to be clasp. thei sat in that 
without look at each other, until the rain abat and began to 
in still. each had been full of thought which neither of 
could begin to utter.

but when the rain wa quiet, dorothea turn to look at will. 
passion exclam, as if some tortur screw were threaten him,
he start up and said, “it is imposs!”

he went and lean on the back of the chair again, and seem to 
battl with hi own anger, while she look toward him sadli.

“it is as fatal as a murder or ani other horror that divid peopl,”
he burst out again; “it is more intoler—to have our life maim 
petti accid.”

“no—don’t sai that—your life need not be maim,” said dorothea,
gentli.

“ye, it must,” said will, angrili. “it is cruel of you to speak 
that wai—as if there were ani comfort. you mai see beyond the miseri 
it, but i don’t. it is unkind—it is throw back my love for you as 
it were a trifl, to speak in that wai in the face of the fact. we 
never be marri.”

“some time—we might,” said dorothea, in a trembl voic.

“when?” said will, bitterli. “what is the us of count on 
success of mine? it is a mere toss up whether i shall ever do more 
keep myself decent, unless i choos to sell myself as a mere pen 
a mouthpiec. i can see that clearli enough. i could not offer 
to ani woman, even if she had no luxuri to renounc.”

there wa silenc. dorothea’s heart wa full of someth that 
want to sai, and yet the word were too difficult. she wa 
possess by them: at that moment debat wa mute within her. and 
wa veri hard that she could not sai what she want to sai. will 
look out of the window angrili. if he would have look at her 
not gone awai from her side, she thought everyth would have 
easier. at last he turn, still rest against the chair, 
stretch hi hand automat toward hi hat, said with a sort 
exasper, “good-by.”

“oh, i cannot bear it—my heart will break,” said dorothea, 
from her seat, the flood of her young passion bear down all 
obstruct which had kept her silent—the great tear rise 
fall in an instant: “i don’t mind about poverti—i hate my wealth.”

in an instant will wa close to her and had hi arm round her, but 
drew her head back and held hi awai gentli that she might go 
speak, her larg tear-fill ey look at hi veri simpli, 
she said in a sob childlik wai, “we could live quit well on 
own fortun—it is too much—seven hundr a-year—i want so littl—no 
cloth—and i will learn what everyth cost.”




chapter lxxxiv.

“though it be song of old and yong,
    that i shold be to blame,
theyr be the charg, that spoke so 
    in hurtyng of my name.”
—_the not-brown mayd_.


it wa just after the lord had thrown out the reform bill: 
explain how mr. cadwallad came to be walk on the slope of 
lawn near the great conservatori at freshitt hall, hold the “time”
in hi hand behind him, while he talk with a trout-fisher’
dispassion about the prospect of the countri to sir 
chettam. mr. cadwallad, the dowag ladi chettam, and celia 
sometim seat on garden-chair, sometim walk to meet 
arthur, who wa be drawn in hi chariot, and, as becam 
infantin bouddha, wa shelter by hi sacr umbrella with 
silken fring.

the ladi also talk polit, though more fitfulli. mr. 
wa strong on the intend creation of peer: she had it for 
from her cousin that truberri had gone over to the other side 
at the instig of hi wife, who had scent peerag in the 
from the veri first introduct of the reform question, and would 
her soul awai to take preced of her younger sister, who had 
a baronet. ladi chettam thought that such conduct wa 
reprehens, and rememb that mr. truberri’s mother wa a 
walsingham of melspr. celia confess it wa nicer to be “ladi” 
“mr.,” and that dodo never mind about preced if she could 
her own wai. mr. cadwallad held that it wa a poor satisfact 
take preced when everybodi about you knew that you had not a 
of good blood in your vein; and celia again, stop to look 
arthur, said, “it would be veri nice, though, if he were a viscount—
hi lordship’s littl tooth come through! he might have been, 
jame had been an earl.”

“my dear celia,” said the dowag, “jame’s titl is worth far 
than ani new earldom. i never wish hi father to be anyth 
than sir jame.”

“oh, i onli meant about arthur’s littl tooth,” said celia,
comfort. “but see, here is my uncl come.”

she trip off to meet her uncl, while sir jame and mr. 
came forward to make on group with the ladi. celia had slip 
arm through her uncl’s, and he pat her hand with a 
melancholi “well, my dear!” as thei approach, it wa evid that mr.
brook wa look deject, but thi wa fulli account for by 
state of polit; and as he wa shake hand all round without 
greet than a “well, you’re all here, you know,” the rector said,
laughingli—

“don’t take the throw out of the bill so much to heart, brook;
you’ve got all the riff-raff of the countri on your side.”

“the bill, eh? ah!” said mr. brook, with a mild distracted 
manner. “thrown out, you know, eh? the lord ar go too far, though.
thei’ll have to pull up. sad new, you know. i mean, here at home—
new. but you must not blame me, chettam.”

“what is the matter?” said sir jame. “not anoth gamekeep shot, 
hope? it’s what i should expect, when a fellow like trap bass 
let off so easili.”

“gamekeep? no. let us go in; i can tell you all in the hous, 
know,” said mr. brook, nod at the cadwallad, to show that 
includ them in hi confid. “as to poacher like trap bass,
you know, chettam,” he continu, as thei were enter, “when you 
a magistr, you’ll not find it so easi to commit. sever is 
veri well, but it’s a great deal easier when you’ve got somebodi to 
it for you. you have a soft place in your heart yourself, 
know—you’re not a draco, a jeffrei, that sort of thing.”

mr. brook wa evid in a state of nervou perturb. when 
had someth pain to tell, it wa usual hi wai to introduc 
among a number of disjoint particular, as if it were a medicin 
would get a milder flavor by mix. he continu hi chat with 
jame about the poacher until thei were all seat, and mr.
cadwallad, impati of thi drivel, said—

“i’m dy to know the sad new. the gamekeep is not shot: that 
settl. what is it, then?”

“well, it’s a veri try thing, you know,” said mr. brook. “i’m 
you and the rector ar here; it’s a famili matter—but you will help 
all to bear it, cadwallad. i’ve got to break it to you, my dear.”
here mr. brook look at celia—“you’ve no notion what it is, you know.
and, chettam, it will annoi you uncommonli—but, you see, you have 
been abl to hinder it, ani more than i have. there’s 
singular in thing: thei come round, you know.”

“it must be about dodo,” said celia, who had been us to think of 
sister as the danger part of the famili machineri. she had 
herself on a low stool against her husband’s knee.

“for god’s sake let us hear what it is!” said sir jame.

“well, you know, chettam, i couldn’t help casaubon’s will: it wa 
sort of will to make thing wors.”

“exactli,” said sir jame, hastili. “but _what_ is wors?”

“dorothea is go to be marri again, you know,” said mr. brook,
nod toward celia, who immedi look up at her husband with 
frighten glanc, and put her hand on hi knee. sir jame wa 
white with anger, but he did not speak.

“merci heaven!” said mr. cadwallad. “not to _young_ ladislaw?”

mr. brook nod, sai, “ye; to ladislaw,” and then fell into 
prudenti silenc.

“you see, humphrei!” said mr. cadwallad, wave her arm toward 
husband. “anoth time you will admit that i have some foresight; 
rather you will contradict me and be just as blind as ever. _you_
suppos that the young gentleman wa gone out of the countri.”

“so he might be, and yet come back,” said the rector, quietli.

“when did you learn thi?” said sir jame, not like to hear ani 
els speak, though find it difficult to speak himself.

“yesterdai,” said mr. brook, meekli. “i went to lowick. dorothea 
for me, you know. it had come about quit suddenli—neither of them 
ani idea two dai ago—not ani idea, you know. there’s 
singular in thing. but dorothea is quit determin—it is no 
oppos. i put it strongli to her. i did my duti, chettam. but she 
act as she like, you know.”

“it would have been better if i had call him out and shot him a 
ago,” said sir jame, not from bloodi-minded, but becaus he 
someth strong to sai.

“realli, jame, that would have been veri disagre,” said celia.

“be reason, chettam. look at the affair more quietli,” said mr.
cadwallad, sorri to see hi good-natur friend so overmast 
anger.

“that is not so veri easi for a man of ani digniti—with ani sens 
right—when the affair happen to be in hi own famili,” said sir jame,
still in hi white indign. “it is perfectli scandal. 
ladislaw had had a spark of honor he would have gone out of the 
at onc, and never shown hi face in it again. howev, i am 
surpris. the dai after casaubon’s funer i said what ought to 
done. but i wa not listen to.”

“you want what wa imposs, you know, chettam,” said mr. brook.
“you want him ship off. i told you ladislaw wa not to be done 
we like with: he had hi idea. he wa a remark fellow—i 
said he wa a remark fellow.”

“ye,” said sir jame, unabl to repress a retort, “it is rather a 
you form that high opinion of him. we ar indebt to that for 
be lodg in thi neighborhood. we ar indebt to that for see 
woman like dorothea degrad herself by marri him.” sir jame 
littl stoppag between hi claus, the word not come easili. “
man so mark out by her husband’s will, that delicaci ought to 
forbidden her from see him again—who take her out of her 
rank—into poverti—ha the mean to accept such a sacrific—
alwai had an objection posit—a bad origin—and, _i believ_, 
a man of littl principl and light charact. that is my opinion.” 
jame end emphat, turn asid and cross hi leg.

“i point everyth out to her,” said mr. brook, apologet—“
mean the poverti, and abandon her posit. i said, ‘my dear, 
don’t know what it is to live on seven hundr a-year, and have 
carriag, and that kind of thing, and go amongst peopl who don’t 
who you ar.’ i put it strongli to her. but i advis you to talk 
dorothea herself. the fact is, she ha a dislik to casaubon’
properti. you will hear what she sai, you know.”

“no—excus me—i shall not,” said sir jame, with more cool. “
cannot bear to see her again; it is too pain. it hurt me too 
that a woman like dorothea should have done what is wrong.”

“be just, chettam,” said the easi, larg-lip rector, who object 
all thi unnecessari discomfort. “mr. casaubon mai be 
imprud: she is give up a fortun for the sake of a man, and 
men have so poor an opinion of each other that we can hardli call 
woman wise who doe that. but i think you should not condemn it as 
wrong action, in the strict sens of the word.”

“ye, i do,” answer sir jame. “i think that dorothea commit a 
action in marri ladislaw.”

“my dear fellow, we ar rather apt to consid an act wrong becaus 
is unpleas to us,” said the rector, quietli. like mani men who 
life easili, he had the knack of sai a home truth occasion 
those who felt themselv virtuous out of temper. sir jame took 
hi handkerchief and began to bite the corner.

“it is veri dread of dodo, though,” said celia, wish to 
her husband. “she said she _never would_ marri again—not anybodi 
all.”

“i heard her sai the same thing myself,” said ladi chettam,
majest, as if thi were royal evid.

“oh, there is usual a silent except in such case,” said mr.
cadwallad. “the onli wonder to me is, that ani of you ar surpris.
you did noth to hinder it. if you would have had lord triton 
here to woo her with hi philanthropi, he might have carri her 
befor the year wa over. there wa no safeti in anyth els. mr.
casaubon had prepar all thi as beautifulli as possibl. he 
himself disagre—or it pleas god to make him so—and then he 
her to contradict him. it’s the wai to make ani trumperi tempt, 
ticket it at a high price in that wai.”

“i don’t know what you mean by wrong, cadwallad,” said sir jame,
still feel a littl stung, and turn round in hi chair 
the rector. “he’s not a man we can take into the famili. at least, 
must speak for myself,” he continu, carefulli keep hi ey 
mr. brook. “i suppos other will find hi societi too pleasant 
care about the proprieti of the thing.”

“well, you know, chettam,” said mr. brook, good-humoredli, nurs 
leg, “i can’t turn my back on dorothea. i must be a father to her up 
a certain point. i said, ‘my dear, i won’t refus to give you awai.’ 
had spoken strongli befor. but i can cut off the entail, you know. 
will cost monei and be troublesom; but i can do it, you know.”

mr. brook nod at sir jame, and felt that he wa both show 
own forc of resolut and propiti what wa just in the baronet’
vexat. he had hit on a more ingeni mode of parri than he 
awar of. he had touch a motiv of which sir jame wa asham. 
mass of hi feel about dorothea’s marriag to ladislaw wa 
partli to excus prejudic, or even justifi opinion, partli to 
jealou repugn hardli less in ladislaw’s case than in casaubon’s.
he wa convinc that the marriag wa a fatal on for dorothea. 
amid that mass ran a vein of which he wa too good and honor a 
to like the avow even to himself: it wa undeni that the union 
the two estat—tipton and freshitt—ly charmingli within 
ring-fenc, wa a prospect that flatter him for hi son and heir.
henc when mr. brook noddingli appeal to that motiv, sir jame 
a sudden embarrass; there wa a stoppag in hi throat; he 
blush. he had found more word than usual in the first jet of 
anger, but mr. brook’s propiti wa more clog to hi 
than mr. cadwallad’s caustic hint.

but celia wa glad to have room for speech after her uncl’s 
of the marriag ceremoni, and she said, though with as littl 
of manner as if the question had turn on an invit to dinner, “
you mean that dodo is go to be marri directli, uncl?”

“in three week, you know,” said mr. brook, helplessli. “i can 
noth to hinder it, cadwallad,” he ad, turn for a 
counten toward the rector, who said—

“_i_ should not make ani fuss about it. if she like to be poor, 
is her affair. nobodi would have said anyth if she had marri 
young fellow becaus he wa rich. plenti of benef clergi ar 
than thei will be. here is elinor,” continu the provok husband;
“she vex her friend by me: i had hardli a thousand a-year—i wa 
lout—nobodi could see anyth in me—my shoe were not the 
cut—all the men wonder how a woman could like me. upon my word, 
must take ladislaw’s part until i hear more harm of him.”

“humphrei, that is all sophistri, and you know it,” said hi wife.
“everyth is all on—that is the begin and end with you. as 
you had not been a cadwallad! doe ani on suppos that i would 
taken such a monster as you by ani other name?”

“and a clergyman too,” observ ladi chettam with approb. “
cannot be said to have descend below her rank. it is difficult to 
what mr. ladislaw is, eh, jame?”

sir jame gave a small grunt, which wa less respect than hi 
mode of answer hi mother. celia look up at him like a 
kitten.

“it must be admit that hi blood is a fright mixtur!” said mr.
cadwallad. “the casaubon cuttl-fish fluid to begin with, and then 
rebelli polish fiddler or danc-master, wa it?—and then an 
clo—”

“nonsens, elinor,” said the rector, rise. “it is time for us to go.”

“after all, he is a pretti sprig,” said mr. cadwallad, rise too,
and wish to make amend. “he is like the fine old crichlei 
befor the idiot came in.”

“i’ll go with you,” said mr. brook, start up with alacr. “
must all come and dine with me to-morrow, you know—eh, celia, my dear?”

“you will, jame—won’t you?” said celia, take her husband’s hand.

“oh, of cours, if you like,” said sir jame, pull down 
waistcoat, but unabl yet to adjust hi face good-humoredli. “that 
to sai, if it is not to meet anybodi els.”

“no, no, no,” said mr. brook, understand the condit. “
would not come, you know, unless you had been to see her.”

when sir jame and celia were alon, she said, “do you mind about 
have the carriag to go to lowick, jame?”

“what, now, directli?” he answer, with some surpris.

“ye, it is veri import,” said celia.

“rememb, celia, i cannot see her,” said sir jame.

“not if she gave up marri?”

“what is the us of sai that?—howev, i’m go to the stabl.
i’ll tell brigg to bring the carriag round.”

celia thought it wa of great us, if not to sai that, at least to 
a journei to lowick in order to influenc dorothea’s mind. all 
their girlhood she had felt that she could act on her sister by a 
judici place—by open a littl window for the daylight of 
own understand to enter among the strang color lamp by 
dodo habitu saw. and celia the matron natur felt more abl 
advis her childless sister. how could ani on understand dodo so 
as celia did or love her so tenderli?

dorothea, busi in her boudoir, felt a glow of pleasur at the sight 
her sister so soon after the revel of her intend marriag. 
had prefigur to herself, even with exagger, the disgust of 
friend, and she had even fear that celia might be kept aloof 
her.

“o kitti, i am delight to see you!” said dorothea, put her 
on celia’s shoulder, and beam on her. “i almost thought you 
not come to me.”

“i have not brought arthur, becaus i wa in a hurri,” said celia, 
thei sat down on two small chair opposit each other, with their 
touch.

“you know, dodo, it is veri bad,” said celia, in her placid guttur,
look as prettili free from humor as possibl. “you 
disappoint us all so. and i can’t think that it ever _will_ be—
never can go and live in that wai. and then there ar all your plan!
you never can have thought of that. jame would have taken ani 
for you, and you might have gone on all your life do what 
like.”

“on the contrari, dear,” said dorothea, “i never could do anyth 
i like. i have never carri out ani plan yet.”

“becaus you alwai want thing that wouldn’t do. but other 
would have come. and how _can_ you marri mr. ladislaw, that we none 
us ever thought you _could_ marri? it shock jame so dreadfulli. 
then it is all so differ from what you have alwai been. you 
have mr. casaubon becaus he had such a great soul, and wa so old 
dismal and learn; and now, to think of marri mr. ladislaw, who 
got no estat or anyth. i suppos it is becaus you must be 
yourself uncomfort in some wai or other.”

dorothea laugh.

“well, it is veri seriou, dodo,” said celia, becom more impress.
“how will you live? and you will go awai among queer peopl. and 
shall never see you—and you won’t mind about littl arthur—and 
thought you alwai would—”

celia’s rare tear had got into her ey, and the corner of her 
were agit.

“dear celia,” said dorothea, with tender graviti, “if you don’t 
see me, it will not be my fault.”

“ye, it will,” said celia, with the same touch distort of 
small featur. “how can i come to you or have you with me when 
can’t bear it?—that is becaus he think it is not right—he think 
ar so wrong, dodo. but you alwai were wrong: onli i can’t help 
you. and nobodi can think where you will live: where can you go?”

“i am go to london,” said dorothea.

“how can you alwai live in a street? and you will be so poor. i 
give you half my thing, onli how can i, when i never see you?”

“bless you, kitti,” said dorothea, with gentl warmth. “take comfort:
perhap jame will forgiv me some time.”

“but it would be much better if you would not be marri,” said celia,
dry her ey, and return to her argument; “then there would 
noth uncomfort. and you would not do what nobodi thought 
could do. jame alwai said you ought to be a queen; but thi is not 
all be like a queen. you know what mistak you have alwai 
make, dodo, and thi is anoth. nobodi think mr. ladislaw a 
husband for you. and you _said_ you would never be marri again.”

“it is quit true that i might be a wiser person, celia,” 
dorothea, “and that i might have done someth better, if i had 
better. but thi is what i am go to do. i have promis to marri mr.
ladislaw; and i am go to marri him.”

the tone in which dorothea said thi wa a note that celia had 
learn to recogn. she wa silent a few moment, and then said, 
if she had dismiss all contest, “is he veri fond of you, dodo?”

“i hope so. i am veri fond of him.”

“that is nice,” said celia, comfort. “onli i would rather you 
such a sort of husband as jame is, with a place veri near, that 
could drive to.”

dorothea smile, and celia look rather medit. present 
said, “i cannot think how it all came about.” celia thought it would 
pleasant to hear the stori.

“i dare sai not,” said dorothea, pinch her sister’s chin. “if 
knew how it came about, it would not seem wonder to you.”

“can’t you tell me?” said celia, settl her arm cozili.

“no, dear, you would have to feel with me, els you would never know.”




chapter lxxxv.

“then went the juri out whose name were mr. blindman, mr. no-good, mr.
malic, mr. love-lust, mr. live-loos, mr. headi, mr. high-mind, mr.
enmiti, mr. liar, mr. cruelti, mr. hate-light, mr. implac, 
everi on gave in hi privat verdict against him among themselv, 
afterward unanim conclud to bring him in guilti befor 
judg. and first among themselv, mr. blindman, the foreman, said, 
see clearli that thi man is a heret. then said mr. no-good, 
with such a fellow from the earth! ay, said mr. malic, for i hate 
veri look of him. then said mr. love-lust, i could never endur him.
nor i, said mr. live-loos; for he would be alwai condemn my wai.
hang him, hang him, said mr. headi. a sorri scrub, said mr. high-mind.
my heart riseth against him, said mr. enmiti. he is a rogu, said mr.
liar. hang is too good for him, said mr. cruelti. let us 
him out of the wai said mr. hate-light. then said mr. implac, 
i have all the world given me, i could not be reconcil to him;
therefor let us forthwith bring him in guilti of death.”—_pilgrim’
progress_.


when immort bunyan make hi pictur of the persecut 
bring in their verdict of guilti, who piti faith? that is 
rare and bless lot which some greatest men have not attain, to 
ourselv guiltless befor a condemn crowd—to be sure that what 
ar denounc for is sole the good in us. the pitiabl lot is that 
the man who could not call himself a martyr even though he were 
persuad himself that the men who stone him were but ugli 
incarn—who know that he is stone, not for profess the right,
but for not be the man he profess to be.

thi wa the conscious that bulstrod wa wither under while 
made hi prepar for depart from middlemarch, and go to 
hi stricken life in that sad refug, the indiffer of new face.
the duteou merci constanc of hi wife had deliv him from 
dread, but it could not hinder her presenc from be still a 
befor which he shrank from confess and desir advocaci. 
equivoc with himself about the death of raffl had sustain 
concept of an omnisci whom he prai to, yet he had a 
upon him which would not let him expos them to judgment by a 
confess to hi wife: the act which he had wash and dilut 
inward argument and motiv, and for which it seem compar 
to win invis pardon—what name would she call them by? that 
should ever silent call hi act murder wa what he could not bear.
he felt shroud by her doubt: he got strength to face her from 
sens that she could not yet feel warrant in pronounc that 
condemn on him. some time, perhap—when he wa dy—he would 
her all: in the deep shadow of that time, when she held hi hand in 
gather dark, she might listen without recoil from hi touch.
perhap: but conceal had been the habit of hi life, and 
impuls to confess had no power against the dread of a 
humili.

he wa full of timid care for hi wife, not onli becaus he 
ani harsh of judgment from her, but becaus he felt a deep 
at the sight of her suffer. she had sent her daughter awai to 
at a school on the coast, that thi crisi might be hidden from them 
far as possibl. set free by their absenc from the 
necess of account for her grief or of behold their 
wonder, she could live unconstrainedli with the sorrow that wa 
dai streak her hair with white and make her eyelid languid.

“tell me anyth that you would like to have me do, harriet,”
bulstrod had said to her; “i mean with regard to arrang 
properti. it is my intent not to sell the land i possess in 
neighborhood, but to leav it to you as a safe provis. if you 
ani wish on such subject, do not conceal it from me.”

a few dai afterward, when she had return from a visit to 
brother’s, she began to speak to her husband on a subject which had 
some time been in her mind.

“i _should_ like to do someth for my brother’s famili, nichola; 
i think we ar bound to make some amend to rosamond and her husband.
walter sai mr. lydgat must leav the town, and hi practic is 
good for noth, and thei have veri littl left to settl 
with. i would rather do without someth for ourselv, to make 
amend to my poor brother’s famili.”

mr. bulstrod did not wish to go nearer to the fact than in 
phrase “make some amend;” know that her husband must 
her. he had a particular reason, which she wa not awar of, 
winc under her suggest. he hesit befor he said—

“it is not possibl to carri out your wish in the wai you propos, 
dear. mr. lydgat ha virtual reject ani further servic from me.
he ha return the thousand pound which i lent him. mr. 
advanc him the sum for that purpos. here is hi letter.”

the letter seem to cut mr. bulstrod sever. the mention of mr.
casaubon’s loan seem a reflect of that public feel which 
it a matter of cours that everi on would avoid a connect with 
husband. she wa silent for some time; and the tear fell on after 
other, her chin trembl as she wipe them awai. bulstrod, 
opposit to her, ach at the sight of that grief-worn face, which 
month befor had been bright and bloom. it had ag to keep 
compani with hi own wither featur. urg into some effort 
comfort her, he said—

“there is anoth mean, harriet, by which i might do a servic to 
brother’s famili, if you like to act in it. and it would, i think, 
benefici to you: it would be an advantag wai of manag the 
which i mean to be your.”

she look attent.

“garth onc thought of undertak the manag of stone court 
order to place your nephew fred there. the stock wa to remain as 
is, and thei were to pai a certain share of the profit instead of 
ordinari rent. that would be a desir begin for the young man,
in conjunct with hi employ under garth. would it be 
satisfact to you?”

“ye, it would,” said mr. bulstrod, with some return of energi. “
walter is so cast down; i would try anyth in my power to do him 
good befor i go awai. we have alwai been brother and sister.”

“you must make the propos to garth yourself, harriet,” said mr.
bulstrod, not like what he had to sai, but desir the end he 
in view, for other reason besid the consol of hi wife. “
must state to him that the land is virtual your, and that he 
have no transact with me. commun can be made 
standish. i mention thi, becaus garth gave up be my agent. i 
put into your hand a paper which he himself drew up, 
condit; and you can propos hi renew accept of them. i 
it is not unlik that he will accept when you propos the thing 
the sake of your nephew.”




chapter lxxxvi.

“le cœur se satur d’amour comm d’un sel divin qui le conserv; de 
l’incorrupt adhérenc de ceux qui se sont aimé dè l’aub de 
vie, et la fraîcheur de viell amour prolongé. il exist 
embaum d’amour. c’est de daphni et chloé que sont fait 
et bauci. cett vieilless-là, ressembl du soir 
l’auror.”—victor hugo: _l’homm qui rit_.


mr. garth, hear caleb enter the passag about tea-time, open 
parlor-door and said, “there you ar, caleb. have you had your dinner?”
(mr. garth’s meal were much subordin to “busi.”)

“oh ye, a good dinner—cold mutton and i don’t know what. where 
mari?”

“in the garden with letti, i think.”

“fred is not come yet?”

“no. ar you go out again without take tea, caleb?” said mr.
garth, see that her absent-mind husband wa put on again 
hat which he had just taken off.

“no, no; i’m onli go to mari a minut.”

mari wa in a grassi corner of the garden, where there wa a 
loftili hung between two pear-tree. she had a pink kerchief ti 
her head, make a littl poke to shade her ey from the 
sunbeam, while she wa give a gloriou swing to letti, who 
and scream wildli.

see her father, mari left the swing and went to meet him, 
back the pink kerchief and smile afar off at him with the 
smile of love pleasur.

“i came to look for you, mari,” said mr. garth. “let us walk about 
bit.”

mari knew quit well that her father had someth particular to sai:
hi eyebrow made their pathet angl, and there wa a tender 
in hi voic: these thing had been sign to her when she wa letti’
ag. she put her arm within hi, and thei turn by the row 
nut-tree.

“it will be a sad while befor you can be marri, mari,” said 
father, not look at her, but at the end of the stick which he 
in hi other hand.

“not a sad while, father—i mean to be merri,” said mari, laughingli. “
have been singl and merri for four-and-twenti year and more: 
suppos it will not be quit as long again as that.” then, after 
littl paus, she said, more grave, bend her face befor 
father’s, “if you ar content with fred?”

caleb screw up hi mouth and turn hi head asid wise.

“now, father, you did prais him last wednesdai. you said he had 
uncommon notion of stock, and a good ey for thing.”

“did i?” said caleb, rather slyli.

“ye, i put it all down, and the date, _anno domini_, and everyth,”
said mari. “you like thing to be neatli book. and then hi 
to you, father, is realli good; he ha a deep respect for you; and 
is imposs to have a better temper than fred ha.”

“ay, ay; you want to coax me into think him a fine match.”

“no, inde, father. i don’t love him becaus he is a fine match.”

“what for, then?”

“oh, dear, becaus i have alwai love him. i should never 
scold ani on els so well; and that is a point to be thought of 
a husband.”

“your mind is quit settl, then, mari?” said caleb, return to 
first tone. “there’s no other wish come into it sinc thing have 
go on as thei have been of late?” (caleb meant a great deal in 
vagu phrase;) “becaus, better late than never. a woman must not 
her heart—she’ll do a man no good by that.”

“my feel have not chang, father,” said mari, calmli. “i shall 
constant to fred as long as he is constant to me. i don’t think 
of us could spare the other, or like ani on els better, howev 
we might admir them. it would make too great a differ to us—
see all the old place alter, and chang the name 
everyth. we must wait for each other a long while; but fred 
that.”

instead of speak immedi, caleb stood still and screw 
stick on the grassi walk. then he said, with emot in hi voic,
“well, i’ve got a bit of new. what do you think of fred go to 
at stone court, and manag the land there?”

“how can that ever be, father?” said mari, wonderingli.

“he would manag it for hi aunt bulstrod. the poor woman ha been 
me beg and prai. she want to do the lad good, and it might be 
fine thing for him. with save, he might gradual bui the stock, 
he ha a turn for farm.”

“oh, fred would be so happi! it is too good to believ.”

“ah, but mind you,” said caleb, turn hi head warningli, “i 
take it on _my_ shoulder, and be respons, and see 
everyth; and that will griev your mother a bit, though she mayn’
sai so. fred had need be care.”

“perhap it is too much, father,” said mari, check in her joi. “
would be no happi in bring you ani fresh troubl.”

“nai, nai; work is my delight, child, when it doesn’t vex your mother.
and then, if you and fred get marri,” here caleb’s voic shook 
percept, “he’ll be steadi and save; and you’ve got your mother’
clever, and mine too, in a woman’s sort of wai; and you’ll keep 
in order. he’ll be come by-and-by, so i want to tell you first,
becaus i think you’d like to tell _him_ by yourselv. after that, 
could talk it well over with him, and we could go into busi and 
natur of thing.”

“oh, you dear good father!” cri mari, put her hand round 
father’s neck, while he bent hi head placidli, will to be caress.
“i wonder if ani other girl think her father the best man in 
world!”

“nonsens, child; you’ll think your husband better.”

“imposs,” said mari, relaps into her usual tone; “husband 
an inferior class of men, who requir keep in order.”

when thei were enter the hous with letti, who had run to join them,
mari saw fred at the orchard-gate, and went to meet him.

“what fine cloth you wear, you extravag youth!” said mari, as 
stood still and rais hi hat to her with play formal. “you 
not learn economi.”

“now that is too bad, mari,” said fred. “just look at the edg 
these coat-cuff! it is onli by dint of good brush that i 
respect. i am save up three suit—on for a wed-suit.”

“how veri droll you will look!—like a gentleman in an 
fashion-book.”

“oh no, thei will keep two year.”

“two year! be reason, fred,” said mari, turn to walk. “don’
encourag flatter expect.”

“why not? on live on them better than on unflatt on. if 
can’t be marri in two year, the truth will be quit bad enough 
it come.”

“i have heard a stori of a young gentleman who onc 
flatter expect, and thei did him harm.”

“mari, if you’ve got someth discourag to tell me, i shall bolt; 
shall go into the hous to mr. garth. i am out of spirit. my father 
so cut up—home is not like itself. i can’t bear ani more bad new.”

“should you call it bad new to be told that you were to live at 
court, and manag the farm, and be remark prudent, and save 
everi year till all the stock and furnitur were your own, and you 
a distinguish agricultur charact, as mr. borthrop 
sai—rather stout, i fear, and with the greek and latin 
weather-worn?”

“you don’t mean anyth except nonsens, mari?” said fred, 
slightli nevertheless.

“that is what my father ha just told me of as what mai happen, and 
never talk nonsens,” said mari, look up at fred now, while 
grasp her hand as thei walk, till it rather hurt her; but she 
not complain.

“oh, i could be a tremend good fellow then, mari, and we could 
marri directli.”

“not so fast, sir; how do you know that i would not rather defer 
marriag for some year? that would leav you time to misbehav, 
then if i like some on els better, i should have an excus 
jilt you.”

“prai don’t joke, mari,” said fred, with strong feel. “tell 
serious that all thi is true, and that you ar happi becaus 
it—becaus you love me best.”

“it is all true, fred, and i am happi becaus of it—becaus i love 
best,” said mari, in a tone of obedi recit.

thei linger on the door-step under the steep-roof porch, and 
almost in a whisper said—

“when we were first engag, with the umbrella-ring, mari, you 
to—”

the spirit of joi began to laugh more decidedli in mari’s ey, but 
fatal ben came run to the door with browni yap behind him,
and, bounc against them, said—

“fred and mari! ar you ever come in?—or mai i eat your cake?”




final.

everi limit is a begin as well as an end. who can quit 
live after be long in compani with them, and not desir to 
what befel them in their after-year? for the fragment of a life,
howev typic, is not the sampl of an even web: promis mai not 
kept, and an ardent outset mai be follow by declens; latent 
mai find their long-wait opportun; a past error mai urg a 
retriev.

marriag, which ha been the bourn of so mani narr, is still 
great begin, as it wa to adam and ev, who kept their honeymoon 
eden, but had their first littl on among the thorn and thistl 
the wilder. it is still the begin of the home epic—the 
conquest or irremedi loss of that complet union which make 
advanc year a climax, and ag the harvest of sweet memori 
common.

some set out, like crusad of old, with a gloriou equip of 
and enthusiasm and get broken by the wai, want patienc with 
other and the world.

all who have care for fred vinci and mari garth will like to know 
these two made no such failur, but achiev a solid mutual happi.
fred surpris hi neighbor in variou wai. he becam 
distinguish in hi side of the counti as a theoret and 
farmer, and produc a work on the “cultiv of green crop and 
economi of cattl-feed” which won him high congratul 
agricultur meet. in middlemarch admir wa more reserv:
most person there were inclin to believ that the merit of fred’
authorship wa due to hi wife, sinc thei had never expect 
vinci to write on turnip and mangel-wurzel.

but when mari wrote a littl book for her boi, call “stori 
great men, taken from plutarch,” and had it print and publish 
gripp & co., middlemarch, everi on in the town wa will to give 
credit of thi work to fred, observ that he had been to 
univers, “where the ancient were studi,” and might have been 
clergyman if he had chosen.

in thi wai it wa made clear that middlemarch had never been deceiv,
and that there wa no need to prais anybodi for write a book, 
it wa alwai done by somebodi els.

moreov, fred remain unswervingli steadi. some year after 
marriag he told mari that hi happi wa half ow to farebroth,
who gave him a strong pull-up at the right moment. i cannot sai that 
wa never again misl by hi hope: the yield of crop or 
profit of a cattl sale usual fell below hi estim; and he 
alwai prone to believ that he could make monei by the purchas of 
hors which turn out badli—though thi, mari observ, wa of 
the fault of the hors, not of fred’s judgment. he kept hi love 
horsemanship, but he rare allow himself a dai’s hunt; and 
he did so, it wa remark that he submit to be laugh at 
cowardli at the fenc, seem to see mari and the boi sit 
the five-bar gate, or show their curli head between hedg 
ditch.

there were three boi: mari wa not discont that she brought 
men-children onli; and when fred wish to have a girl like her, 
said, laughingli, “that would be too great a trial to your mother.”
mr. vinci in her declin year, and in the diminish lustr of 
housekeep, wa much comfort by her percept that two at least 
fred’s boi were real vinci, and did not “featur the garth.” 
mari secretli rejoic that the youngest of the three wa veri 
what her father must have been when he wore a round jacket, and 
a marvel niceti of aim in plai at marbl, or in throw 
to bring down the mellow pear.

ben and letti garth, who were uncl and aunt befor thei were well 
their teen, disput much as to whether nephew or niec were 
desir; ben contend that it wa clear girl were good for 
than boi, els thei would not be alwai in petticoat, which 
how littl thei were meant for; whereupon letti, who argu much 
book, got angri in repli that god made coat of skin for both 
and ev alik—also it occur to her that in the east the men too 
petticoat. but thi latter argument, obscur the majesti of 
former, wa on too mani, for ben answer contemptu, “the 
spoonei thei!” and immedi appeal to hi mother whether 
were not better than girl. mr. garth pronounc that both were 
naughti, but that boi were undoubtedli stronger, could run faster, 
throw with more precis to a greater distanc. with thi 
sentenc ben wa well satisfi, not mind the naughti; but 
took it ill, her feel of superior be stronger than 
muscl.

fred never becam rich—hi hope had not led him to expect that;
but he gradual save enough to becom owner of the stock 
furnitur at stone court, and the work which mr. garth put into 
hand carri him in plenti through those “bad time” which ar 
present with farmer. mari, in her matronli dai, becam as solid 
figur as her mother; but, unlik her, gave the boi littl 
teach, so that mr. garth wa alarm lest thei should never be 
ground in grammar and geographi. nevertheless, thei were found 
forward enough when thei went to school; perhap, becaus thei 
like noth so well as be with their mother. when fred wa 
home on winter even he had a pleasant vision beforehand of 
bright hearth in the wainscot parlor, and wa sorri for other men 
could not have mari for their wife; especi for mr. farebroth. “
wa ten time worthier of you than i wa,” fred could now sai to her,
magnanim. “to be sure he wa,” mari answer; “and for that 
he could do better without me. but you—i shudder to think what 
would have been—a curat in debt for hors-hire and 
pocket-handkerchief!”

on inquiri it might possibl be found that fred and mari still 
stone court—that the creep plant still cast the foam of 
blossom over the fine stone-wall into the field where the walnut-
stand in state row—and that on sunni dai the two lover who 
first engag with the umbrella-ring mai be seen in white-
placid at the open window from which mari garth, in the dai of 
peter featherston, had often been order to look out for mr. lydgat.

lydgat’s hair never becam white. he di when he wa onli fifti,
leav hi wife and children provid for by a heavi insur on 
life. he had gain an excel practic, altern, accord 
the season, between london and a continent bath-place; 
written a treatis on gout, a diseas which ha a good deal of 
on it side. hi skill wa reli on by mani pai patient, but 
alwai regard himself as a failur: he had not done what he 
meant to do. hi acquaint thought him enviabl to have so 
a wife, and noth happen to shake their opinion. rosamond 
commit a second compromis indiscret. she simpli continu 
be mild in her temper, inflex in her judgment, dispos to 
her husband, and abl to frustrat him by stratagem. as the year 
on he oppos her less and less, whenc rosamond conclud that he 
learn the valu of her opinion; on the other hand, she had a 
thorough convict of hi talent now that he gain a good incom,
and instead of the threaten cage in bride street provid on 
flower and gild, fit for the bird of paradis that she resembl.
in brief, lydgat wa what is call a success man. but he 
prematur of diphtheria, and rosamond afterward marri an 
and wealthi physician, who took kindli to her four children. she made 
veri pretti show with her daughter, drive out in her carriag, 
often spoke of her happi as “a reward”—she did not sai for what,
but probabl she meant that it wa a reward for her patienc 
tertiu, whose temper never becam faultless, and to the 
occasion let slip a bitter speech which wa more memor than 
sign he made of hi repent. he onc call her hi basil plant;
and when she ask for an explan, said that basil wa a 
which had flourish wonderfulli on a murder man’s brain. 
had a placid but strong answer to such speech. why then had he 
her? it wa a piti he had not had mr. ladislaw, whom he wa 
prais and place abov her. and thu the convers end 
the advantag on rosamond’s side. but it would be unjust not to tell,
that she never utter a word in depreci of dorothea, keep 
religi remembr the generos which had come to her aid in 
sharpest crisi of her life.

dorothea herself had no dream of be prais abov other women,
feel that there wa alwai someth better which she might 
done, if she had onli been better and known better. still, she 
repent that she had given up posit and fortun to marri 
ladislaw, and he would have held it the greatest shame as well 
sorrow to him if she had repent. thei were bound to each other by 
love stronger than ani impuls which could have mar it. no 
would have been possibl to dorothea which wa not fill with emot,
and she had now a life fill also with a benefic activ which 
had not the doubt pain of discov and mark out for herself.
will becam an ardent public man, work well in those time 
reform were begun with a young hope of immedi good which 
been much check in our dai, and get at last return 
parliament by a constitu who paid hi expens. dorothea could 
like noth better, sinc wrong exist, than that her 
should be in the thick of a struggl against them, and that she 
give him wife help. mani who knew her, thought it a piti that 
substant and rare a creatur should have been absorb into the 
of anoth, and be onli known in a certain circl as a wife and mother.
but no on state exactli what els that wa in her power she 
rather to have done—not even sir jame chettam, who went no 
than the neg prescript that she ought not to have marri 
ladislaw.

but thi opinion of hi did not caus a last alien; and the 
in which the famili wa made whole again wa characterist of 
concern. mr. brook could not resist the pleasur of 
with will and dorothea; and on morn when hi pen had 
remark fluent on the prospect of municip reform, it ran off 
an invit to the grang, which, onc written, could not be 
awai with at less cost than the sacrific (hardli to be conceiv) 
the whole valuabl letter. dure the month of thi correspond mr.
brook had continu, in hi talk with sir jame chettam, 
presuppos or hint that the intent of cut off the 
wa still maintain; and the dai on which hi pen gave the 
invit, he went to freshitt expressli to intim that he had 
stronger sens than ever of the reason for take that energet 
as a precaut against ani mixtur of low blood in the heir of 
brook.

but that morn someth excit had happen at the hall. a 
had come to celia which made her cry silent as she read it; and 
sir jame, unus to see her in tear, ask anxious what wa 
matter, she burst out in a wail such as he had never heard from 
befor.

“dorothea ha a littl boi. and you will not let me go and see her. 
i am sure she want to see me. and she will not know what to do 
the babi—she will do wrong thing with it. and thei thought she 
die. it is veri dread! suppos it had been me and littl arthur, 
dodo had been hinder from come to see me! i wish you would be 
unkind, jame!”

“good heaven, celia!” said sir jame, much wrought upon, “what do 
wish? i will do anyth you like. i will take you to town to-morrow 
you wish it.” and celia did wish it.

it wa after thi that mr. brook came, and meet the baronet in 
ground, began to chat with him in ignor of the new, which 
jame for some reason did not care to tell him immedi. but 
the entail wa touch on in the usual wai, he said, “my dear sir, 
is not for me to dictat to you, but for my part i would let 
alon. i would let thing remain as thei ar.”

mr. brook felt so much surpris that he did not at onc find out 
much he wa reliev by the sens that he wa not expect to 
anyth in particular.

such be the bent of celia’s heart, it wa inevit that sir 
should consent to a reconcili with dorothea and her husband. 
women love each other, men learn to smother their mutual dislik. 
jame never like ladislaw, and will alwai prefer to have 
jame’s compani mix with anoth kind: thei were on a foot 
reciproc toler which wa made quit easi onli when dorothea 
celia were present.

it becam an understood thing that mr. and mr. ladislaw should pai 
least two visit dure the year to the grang, and there 
gradual a small row of cousin at freshitt who enjoi plai 
the two cousin visit tipton as much as if the blood of 
cousin had been less dubious mix.

mr. brook live to a good old ag, and hi estat wa inherit 
dorothea’s son, who might have repres middlemarch, but declin,
think that hi opinion had less chanc of be stifl if 
remain out of door.

sir jame never ceas to regard dorothea’s second marriag as 
mistak; and inde thi remain the tradit concern it 
middlemarch, where she wa spoken of to a younger gener as a 
girl who marri a sickli clergyman, old enough to be her father, 
in littl more than a year after hi death gave up her estat to 
hi cousin—young enough to have been hi son, with no properti, and 
well-born. those who had not seen anyth of dorothea usual 
that she could not have been “a nice woman,” els she would not 
marri either the on or the other.

certainli those determin act of her life were not 
beauti. thei were the mix result of young and nobl 
struggl amidst the condit of an imperfect social state, in 
great feel will often take the aspect of error, and great faith 
aspect of illus. for there is no creatur whose inward be is 
strong that it is not greatli determin by what li outsid it. a 
theresa will hardli have the opportun of reform a 
life, ani more than a new antigon will spend her heroic pieti 
dare all for the sake of a brother’s burial: the medium in 
their ardent deed took shape is forev gone. but we 
peopl with our daili word and act ar prepar the live of 
dorothea, some of which mai present a far sadder sacrific than 
of the dorothea whose stori we know.

her fine touch spirit had still it fine issu, though thei 
not wide visibl. her full natur, like that river of which 
broke the strength, spent itself in channel which had no great name 
the earth. but the effect of her be on those around her 
incalcul diffus: for the grow good of the world is 
depend on unhistor act; and that thing ar not so ill with 
and me as thei might have been, is half ow to the number who 
faithfulli a hidden life, and rest in unvisit tomb.

the 

